

--- Page Break ---



--- Page Break ---



--- Page Break ---

TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER NO. 1 Page
COAL
1.1 Introduction 1
1.2 Mode of Formation 1
1.2.1 The “Insitu” Theory 1
1.2.2 The “Drift” Theory 2
1.3 Classification of coal by Rank 2
1.3.1 Peat 3
1.3.2 Lignite 3
1.3.3 Bituminous Coals 3
1.3.4 Anthracite Coal 4
1.4 Selection of Coal 4
1.4.1 Calorific Value 4
1.4. 2 Moisture content 4
1.4.3 Ash Content 4
1.5 Impurities Associated With Coal 5
CHAPTER NO. 2
COAL MINING METHODS
2.1 Factors Affecting the Choice of Coal Mining Methods 7
2.1.1 Thickness of Over-Burden 7
2.1.2 Character of Roof and Floor 7
2.1.3 Character of Coal (Liable to Spontaneous Heating) 7
2.1.4 Inclination and Thickness of Seam 7
2.1.5 Presence of Inflammable Gas 7
2.2 Types of Coal Mining Methods 8
2.2.1 Room and Pillar Method 8
2.2.2 Long wall Method of Mining 10
(i) Long Wall Advancing 10
(ii) Long-Wall Re-Treating 12
2.2.3 Horizon Mining 13
CHAPTER NO. 3
DEVELOPMENT OF COAL SEAM
3.1 Introduction 16
3.2 Conditions Governing the Development 16
3.2.1 Topography 16
3.2.2 Effect of Inclination of Coal Seam 16
3.3 Development of Coal Based on Entry System 17
3.3.1 Single Entry System 17
3.3.2 Double Entry System 17
Advantages of Double Entry System Over Single Entry
3.3.3  18
System 
3.3.4 Triple Entry System 18
3.3.5 Quadruple Entry System 18
3.3.6 Quintuple Entry System 19
i

--- Page Break ---

3.4 Factors Effecting Size of Entries 19
3.4.1 Size of Pillars 19
3.4.2 Ventilation Required 19
3.4.3 Purpose of Entries 19
3.4.4 Local Condition 20
3.4.5 Production Level 20
3.4.6 Lie of Mine Expectancy (Expected Life of Mine) 20
3.5 Distances Between Entries 20
3.6 Factors Affecting Direction and Location of Entries. 21
3.6.1 Shape of Property 21
3.6.2 Cleavage Planes in Coal Seam 21
3.6.3 Dip of Coal Seam 21
3.6.4 Geological Formation of Seam 21
3.6.5 Amount of Water 21
CHAPTER NO. 4
LONGWALL MINING METHODS
4.1 Longwall Advancing by mechanical Means 22
4.1.1 Sketch 22
4.1.2 Application 23
4.1.3 Development for Flat Seams 23
4.1.4 Development for Inclined Seams 24
4.2 Longwall Retreating, by Mechanical Means. 26
4.2.1 Sketch 26
4.3 Hand-worked long-wall Mining Method 28
4.3.1 Application 28
4.3.2 Development 29
CHAPTER NO. 5
ROOM AND PILLAR MINING METHOD
5.1 Application 31
5.2 Phases of Operation 31
5.2.1 Development of Rooms and Entries 31
5.2.2 Pillar Mining – Depillaring 32
5.3 Method Development of Entries and Room 32
5.3.1 The Block System 33
5.3.2 The Room and Entries System Partial Extraction 34
5.3.3 The Room and Entry System-Full Extractions 35
5.4 Advantages of Room & Pillar System 36
5.5 Precautions in Robbing Pillars 36
CHAPTER NO. 6
SURFACE COAL MINING METHODS
6.1 Introduction 39
6.2 Classification 39
6.3 Open Cast Mining Method 39
6.3.1 Application 39
6.3.2 Sequence of Development 39
6.3.3 Cycle of Operation 40
ii

--- Page Break ---

6.3.4 Condition Suitable for Open Cast Mining 40
6.4 Auger Mining 40
6.4.1 Application 41
6.4.2 Sequence of Development 41
6.4.3 Cycle of Operations 41
6.4.4 Conditions Suitable for Auger Mining 41
6.5 Strip Mining. 42
6.5.1 Stripping Ratio-Break Even Stripping Ratio 42
6.5.2 Strip Mining with Shovel 42
6.5.3 Strip Mining with Dragline 44
6.5.4 Strip Mining with Bucket Wheel Excavator 45
CHAPTER NO. 7
OXIDATION OF COAL AND SPONTANEOUS
COMBUSTION
7.1 Introduction 47
7.1.1 Oxidation 47
7.1.2 Spontaneous Combustion 47
7.2 Situations Liable to Spontaneous Combustion. 47
7.3 Common Sites of Heating 48
7.3.1 Face Starting Lines (Near the Face) 48
7.3.2 Road Side Packs 48
7.3.3 Deep Seated Waste Heating 48
7.3.4 Finished Faces (Edges of Solid Coal Pillars and Ribs) 49
7.4 Detection of Spontaneous Combustion 49
7.4.1 Sweating 49
7.4.2 Haze 49
7.4.3 Smell 49
7.4.4 Hot Surfaces 49
7.4.5 Smoke 50
7.4.6 Concentration of Carbon Monoxide 50
7.4.7 Routine Analysis 50
7.4.8 Detector Tubes 50
7.5 Remedial Techniques 51
7.5.1 Digging Out 51
7.5.2 Roadway Lining 51
7.5.3 Cement, Nitrogen Injection 51
7.5.4 Sealing 52
7.6 Prevention 53
7.6.1 Air Tight Packing 53
CHAPTER NO. 8
MINE LIGHTING
8.1 Definition of Relative Terms 55
8.1.1 Candle Power (CP) 55
8.1.2 The Lumen 55
8.1.3 Foot Candle 55
8.1.4 Luminance or Brightness of an Illuminated Surface 56
8.2 Lamps used for Lighting 57
8.2.1 Flame Safety Lamp 57
8.2.2 Electric Safety Lamp 57
iii

--- Page Break ---

Lead Acid Electric Lamp (Oldham-Wheat Lead – Acid Cap
8.2.2.1  59
Lamp) 
8.2.2.2 Alkaline Cap Lamp (Ceag) 60
8.2.2.3 Pneumatic Electric Lamps 60
8.3 Colliery Lamp Rooms 61
8.3.1 Purpose. 61
8.3.2 Advantages & Disadvantages of Self Service Lamp Rooms 62
8.3.3 Maintenance of Safety Lamps 63
8.4 Main Lighting Underground 64
8.4.1 At the Pit Bottom and Main Haulage Junctions 64
8.4.2 Lighting at the Coal Face 64
CHAPTER NO. 9
FUELS
9.1 Introduction 66
9.2 Classification of Fuels 66
9.2.1 Solid (Natural or Primary) Fuels 66
9.2.1.1 Solid Artificial or Secondary Fuels 67
9.2.2 Liquids (Natural or Primary) Fuels 69
9.2.2.1 Liquid (Artificial or Secondary) Fuels 69
9.2.3 Gas (Natural or Primary) Fuel 71
9.2.3.1 Gas (Artificial or Secondary) Fuel 71
9.3 Combustion 73
9.3.1 Introduction 73
9.3.2 Combustion of Peat 74
CHAPTER NO. 10
CARBONIZATION
10.1 Definition 75
10.2 Types of Carbonization 75
10.3 Products 75
CHAPTER NO. 11
ANALYSIS OF COAL 78
11.1 Introduction 78
11.2 Proximate Analysis 78
11.2.1 Moisture 78
11.2.2 Volatile Matter 78
11.2.3 Ash 79
11.2.4 Fixed Carbon 79
11.3 Ultimate Analysis 79
11.3.1 Carbon and Hydrogen 79
11.3.2 Nitrogen 80
11.3.3 Sulphur 80
11.3.4 Ash 80
11.3.5 Oxygen 80
iv

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER NO. 12
MINE WATER
12.1 Underground Water 82
12.2 Sources of Water 82
12.2.1 Surface Inflow through Out Crops 82
12.2.2 Surface Water through Cracked Broken Measure 82
12.2.3 Water from Permeable Measures 82
12.3 Water Table 83
12.3.1 Introduction 83
12.4 Means of Dewatering 83
12.4.1 Drain Tunnels 84
12.4.2 Hoisting Water 84
12.4.3 Pumping 84
12.4.3.1 Types of Pumps 84
12.4.4 Sumps 86
12.4.4.1 Size of Sumps 87
12.4.4.2 Location of Pumps 87
12.5 Grouting 87
12.5.1 Cementation 87
12.5.2 Freezing Process 89
v

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-01
COAL
1.1 Introduction:
Coal is a highly carbonaceous matter that has been found as a result of alteration of vegetable
matter (e.g. plants) under certain favourable conditions. It is chiefly composed of C.H.N and O,
besides non-combustible inorganic matter. The formation of coal is not an Instantaneous process,
but is extremely lengthy spread over a long span of time. Millions of years ago when the
temperature was moderate, rain fall was heavy and vegetation was quite thick especially in low
lying areas of earth. Under the combined effects of high pressure and bacteria, plants got converted
into coal.
Uses of Coal as a Fuel:
1. Coal is a useful fuel because it is abundant and has relatively high heating value. However,
coal has certain impurities that limit its usefulness as a fuel. These impurities include sulphur,
silica, iron and phosphorus. The high contents of sulphur i.e. more than 1 % cause serious
air pollution.
2. Coal is used as a fuel chiefly in the production of electricity. Electric Power plants use more
than two-third i.e. 66% of coal in the United States.
3. It is used in Asia and Europe for heating purposes.
4. In Pakistan, Coal is used in making briquettes, which in turn are used in the construction
works.
5. Coal is also used as a fuel by the cement and paper industry.
6. Coal is also used in making Coke. The process of preparing coke from coal is known as
carbonization which takes about 1.4 metric tons of bituminous coking coal which has low
sulphur and ash contents.
1.2 Mode of Formation:
Coal seams are divided as to whether coal seams occupy the original site of growth (the “in situ
Theory”) or represent the remains of drifted material carried away and deposited in lakes or lagoons
(The ‘drift’ theory).
1.2.1 The “Insitu” Theory:
According to this theory, coal formation took place at the place of vegetation itself i.e. at the same
place where they were originated. As the land kept on sinking the rate of subsidence increased. It
buried the wood forests which after a many millions years formed coal deposits.
Arguments put forward in favour of this theory include:-
Page | 1

--- Page Break ---

1. The wide extent of many coal seams.
2. Their uniform thickness and character our wide areas.
3. The Purity of coal (apart from dirt bands).
4. The occurrence of under clays i.e. free from lime, iron and alkalis.
5. Marine shells are not found in coal seams. Absence of marine shells from coal seams.
6. The presence of vertical stems of fossil trees.
1.2.2 The Drift Theory:
According to this theory, trees etc. were uprooted and transported by rivers to big lakes and other
deep depressions, which got filled and blocked. These huge piles of wood then got buried
underneath. Later on under high temperature, excessive pressure, absence of oxygen, presence of
bacteria and time; the cellulose material of wood underwent gradual decomposition with
simultaneous liberation of gases (such as CO2 and methane) and coal came into existence.
This asserts that during coal measure times, plant debris from the low lying forests was transported
to lakes, lagoons or even the sea. They were deposited there in the same manner as other
sediments and the various materials were sorted out in accordance with their specific gravities. A
pure coal would be laid down in places where lightest materials have access.
The arguments put forward in favour of this theory include:
1) The great thickness of some coal seams;
2) The presence of dirt bands in many seams, ranging up to several meters in thickness.
3) The composite character of some seams e.g. dull coal followed by a layer of bituminous coal;
4) The absence of under-clays in some cases.
5) Fossil trees are more usually found lying at angles other than the vertical.
1.3 Classification of coal by Rank:
Various types of Coal commonly recognized on basis of rank or degrees of alteration are:
1. Wood. 2. Peat 3. Lignite 4. Bituminous 5. Anthracite
The process of transformation of wood to anthracite results in:-
(i) Increase in Carbon Content.
(ii) Increase in hardness.
(iii) Decrease in oxygen Content.
(iv) Decrease in moisture content.
(v) Decrease in volatile matter.
(vi) Increase in Calorific value.
Page | 2

--- Page Break ---

1.3.1 Peat:
It is brown, jelly like mass. It is regarded as the first stage in the coalification of wood. Peat is
mostly dug by manual Labour. It is un-economical fuel as it may contain as much as 80-90 water.
On air-drying after one to two months, it burns freely. The average composition of air dried peat is.
C = 57 %
H = 6 %
O = 35 %
Ash Content = 2.5 to 6 %
Its calorific value is about 5400 Kcal/Kg on dry basis.
1.3.2 Lignite:
It is soft, brown colored variety of coal of lowest rank. It is compact in texture and contains 20-60%
moisture. On air drying it breaks up into small pieces. Air-dried lignite coal contains:
C = 60-70 %
O2 = 20 %
Lignite burns with long smoky flame. The calorific value is about 5500-7000 Kcal/Kg on air drying
basis. Its most important use is in the manufacture of producer gas.
1.3.3 Bituminous Coals:
These are pitch-black to dark gray coal with very bright and dull layers.
a) Sub-bituminous coals are black in colour. They are more homogeneous and smooth in
appearance. The moisture and volatile contents are high. On exposure in air, these crumble
in to small pieces. They are-coking coals in which carbon content varies from 75-83% and
oxygen content 10-20 %.
b) Bituminous coals have typical banded appearance. Carbon content range from 78-90%. The
calorification value on ash free dry basis is about 800 to 8500 Kcal/Kg. Coal of
Page | 3

--- Page Break ---

this class is used in making metallurgical coke, coal gas and for steam raising and domestic
heating.
c) Semi-bituminous coal includes varieties of bituminous coals that have carbon content 90-93%
and have low volatile matter. These are used for coke manufacturing. Calorification value
ranges from 8500 to 8600 Kcal/Kg.
1.3.4 Anthracite Coal:
It is a class of highest rank coal. It contains carbon content 92-98%. It is poorest in volatile matter
and moisture content. They are hardest of all kinds of coals. They are quite dense and lustrous in
appearance. The volatile matter is less than 8 % therefore ignites with difficulty. They are without
any smoke and possess no coking power. The calorific value ranges from 8600 to 8700 Kcal/Kg and
ash content is about 3.0%. They are used for steam raising, house hold purposes, in metallurgical
purposes where no smoke and high local heat in required.
1.4 Selection of Coal:
Following factors are taken into consideration for selection of coal for different uses:
1) Calorific value.
2) Moisture content.
3) Ash content
4) Calorific intensity.
5) Size of Coal.
6) Coking quality.
7) Sulphur and phosphorous Content.
1.4.1 Calorific Value:
It should be high. Larger quantities of heat can be obtained from a smaller quantity of coal. This
reduces the cost of storage and handling also.
1.4.2 Moisture content:
It should be low. Moisture reduces the heating value. Moreover moisture involves loss of many
because it is paid for at the same rate as the coal.
1.4.3 Ash Content:
It should also be low. Ash is non-combustible and it reduces the heating value of coal. Each percent
of ash in coal means a heat loss of about 1.5%. Moreover the composition and melting point of ash
are important factors.
i) Composition of Ash:
It is of great importance in metallurgical operation because it effects, the metal and slag
composition Ash is an important point in selecting proper flux in metallurgical operations.
Page | 4

--- Page Break ---

ii) Melting Temperature of Ash:
It is of great importance when coal is used in a boiler. In Common boilers, it is desirable that
0
melting temperature of ash should be above 1430  C.
4) Calorific Intensity:
It is defined as the maximum temperature at which coal is burnt completely. In general coal should
have a high calorific intensity.
5) Size of Coal:
It should be uniform so as to facilitate both its handling and the regulation of combustion process.
Smaller particles of coal mixed with larger lumps interfere with free moment and gases.
6) Coking Quality:
If a coal on heating becomes porous, hard and strong than the original coal it is known as coking
coal. If a coal on heating becomes soften and plastic then it is called caking coal.
It should be noted that all coking coals are caking coal but all caking coals are not coking coals.
Coking coals are suitable for metallurgical purposes because they are strong and not crushed under
the weight of ore in furnaces.
7) Suphur & Phosphorus Contents:
Sulphur and phosphorus contents for coal of metallurgical purposes should be as low as possible.
These badly affect the properties of the metal produced.
1.5 Impurities Associated With Coal:
Coal has certain impurities that limit its usefulness as a fuel. These impurities include sulphur,
phosphorus, ash contents and iron pyrites etc.
1.5.1 Sulphur:
It is an objectionable ingredient of coal whether used for domestic or steam-raising purposes or for
gas or coke manufacturing because:-
a) It produces clinker in the furnace;
b) It yields corrosive sulphurous fumes on burning and pollutes the atmosphere;
c) It renders the coal unsuitable for metallurgical purposes producing “red-shortness” in iron
and steel.
d) When in the form of pyrites it often contains arsenic which makes fuel dangerous for melting
purposes.
1.5.2 Phosphorous:
This element is present in coal as a part of organic substance but only in traces up to about 0.2%.
It remains in the ash on combustion. It is an injurious constituent in fuels like anthracite or coking
coal that are used in metallurgical operations, for it produces “cold-shortness” in iron or steel.
Page | 5

--- Page Break ---

1.5.3 Ash:
The ash of coal is the incombustible mineral matter which remains after complete combustion has
taken place. Some small proportion of the ash is made up of in organic elements. Most of the ash
however comprises mineral matters i.e. mechanically mixed with the coal. The composition of the
ash varies in different seams but the main constituents are silica as sand or silicates, alumina, iron
oxide, lime magnesia, alkalies (compounds of sodium and potashium) with oxides of sulphur and
phosphorus.
1.5.4 Iron Pyrites (FeS2):
This sulphide of iron may be present either as fine grains or in the form of balls or nodules. It
crystallizes in two forms, either in the cubic system or in the rhombic system. Pyrites is supposed to
owe its origin due to the reducing action of decomposing organic matter and bacteria on circulating
water containing carbonate of iron and the sulphates of lime and magnesia.
Effect of Impurities on Commercial Values:
i. Sulphur reduces the commercial value of the coal as a fuel as it yields noxious fumes
and helps to produce clinker in the furnace.
ii. Silica also reduces the value because it is incombustible.
iii. Iron is objectionable because it forms a fusible ash which hinders combustion.
iv. Phosphorus has no material effect.
Page | 6

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-02
COAL MINING METHODS
2.1 Factors Affecting the Choice of Coal Mining Methods:
The particular application of any method depends upon the following factors:-
1. Thickness of over burden-depth.
2. Character of roof and floor.
3. Character of coal (liable to spontaneous heating).
4. Dip and thickness of seam.
5. Presence of inflammable gases.
2.1.1 Thickness of Over–Burden:
Thickness of over-burden is an important factor, which determines the depth of seam from the
surface. The seam with shallow depth can be worked by surface mining or long wall system. The
thick and deep seams are recommended to be worked by the room & pillar method.
2.1.2 Character of Roof and Floor:
If the roof & floor are strong then they can bear the pressure from above. A wider gallery can be
driven with by long wall advancing with or without packing. In the case of weak roof conditions it will
tend to collapse. Hence long-wall retreating would be preferable. A strong roof and thick seam
would suggest room and pillar. A weak floor would heave and will disturb the size of galleries.
Permanent attention of repair work would be needed.
2.1.3 Character of Coal (Liable to Spontaneous Heating):
Seams liable to spontaneous heating are recommended to be worked on long wall retreating
system. In case of thick seam at a greater depth which otherwise would have been suggested by
room and pillar will be worked by long wall retreating system.
2.1.4 Inclination and Thickness of Seam:
Flat or relatively flat seams can be mined out by any method of mining. However, the governing
factors would be the thickness and character of coal seam. If the seam is inclined then room and
pillar method of mining is not adopted. Steeper inclination would suggest long-wall method of
mining.
2.1.5 Presence of Inflammable Gas:
In the presence of methane (firedamp) the method of working must involve the minimum number of
dead ends, especially to the rise, where methane, being lighter than air usually accumulates.
In gassy seams every production face with its development headings must be ventilated by its own
individual air current, obtained by additional development roads and special ventilation layouts. In
mines of class-01 gassiness, this regulation is sometimes waived.
Page | 7

--- Page Break ---

The special geological conditions of the seam greatly affect the choice of method of working.
2.2 Types of Coal Mining Methods:
There are only two principle methods of working a coal seam.
1. By the Room & Pillar system.
2. By the long wall system.
2.2.1 Room and Pillar Method:
Introduction:
The room and pillar is also known as Board and Pillar, Pillar and stall, stoop and room or post and
Bank. Its distinctive feature is that the seam of coal is first split up into square or rectangular shaped
pillars of solid coal by driving a series of narrow roadways parallel to each other. These roadways
are connected at intervals by cut-through or cross headings. Later, the pillars themselves may be
partially or wholly extracted by a series of lifts or slices.
In general, the roadways are supported by props and bars, but no packs are built except in special
cases. The roof in the goaf is allowed to fall freely behind a row of hardwood chocks which serves to
protect the working pace along side.
Figure 2.1 shows an orthodox arrangement of one panel of board and Pillar workings. The roadways
are shown by single lines.
Roads A, B and C are three main roads, driven from the shaft. They are interconnected at intervals
for ventilation.
The panel is separated from the main roads by a barrier of solid coal, entry to the panel being
gained by three roads only. This serves to isolate the panel and enables it to be sealed off rapidly in
case of need.
Within the panel itself, the pillars are formed by driving roads at right angles as far as the selected
boundary. The formation of pillars is called the “First Working” or the “whole working”. The work of
removing pillars comes later and is called the “broken working” or “depillaring” or simply “pillar
working” or pillar extraction”.
Roads at right angle to the main cleat of the coal are called “boards” the working face being parallel
to the cleat.
Roads driven parallel to the cleat of coal are termed as “walls” or headings. The coal in a “board” is
usually easier to get and boards are usually driven wider than wallss or headings. It has usually
been seen that the roof of the “walls” is usually better than that in the “boards”. It is because that, in
board, the coal slides of the road are “on end” and therefore strong. On the other hand, in “walls” the
coal slides are “on face” and therefore weaker. The roof conditions in the case of “wall” can be
improved by distributing the load on the face.
Page | 8

--- Page Break ---

Size of Pillars:
This is governed by the following factors:
1. Nature of the coal.
2. Depth from the surface.
3. Nature of roof and floor beds.
4. The time interval required between formation and extraction of pillars.
The pillar size increases with depths.
Removal of Pillars:
The extraction of the pillars may be delayed until the panel boundary has been reached. The coal is
then being worked by retreating method.
Each pillar is extracted by a series of lifts or slices, the roof therein being supported by props and
bars. The roof alongside the goaf may be further supported by a row of hardwood chocks. When a
lift has been completed, the whole of support and other equipments are withdrawn and the roof is
allowed to fall.
In all cases, the pillars should be extracted in such a way so as to maintain an approximately
0 
diagonal goaf line, cutting across the pillars at 45 degrees or so. This distributes the roof pressure
over several ranges of pillars and reduces the incidence of heavy periodical roof weights.
Page | 9

--- Page Break ---

Ventilation of Pillar Workings:
As shown in figure 2.1, the centre road in the panel forms the main intake for the pillars concerned,
the air is kept to the desired course by door (where needed for transport), by brick stopping (where
roads are permanently sealed off) or by brattice cloths (where the ventilating pressure is low).
At the face, the air splits right and left and directed into each working place in succession by sheets
and brattice partitions. Where possible, the air should be arranged to pass from the whole working
to the broken workings so that gases from the goaf may pass direct into the return.
Field of Application:
This method is applicable, if:-
1. The coal seam is fairly thick i.e. not less than one meter.
2. The coal seam is free from dirt bands.
3. Seams are flat.
4. The floor and roofs are strong enough.
5. Coal seam lies at moderate depth less than 500 meter.
6. Seams are free from gases and not liable to spontaneous combustion.
7. Seams lie under town railways, rivers, residential buildings.
2.2.2 Long wall Method of Mining:
The long wall method of mining may be either advancing or retreating.
i Long Wall Advancing:
Long wall advancing is adopted in 70 percent of coal mines in the world. Its wide spread use is
being due to the conditions that whole of the coal is extracted in given areas in one operation by a
long advancing face. The sag or descent of the roof over the working area and over the goaf is
controlled either by props and bars or sometimes by chocks at the face and sometimes by packs
which may fill the whole goaf (complete packing or solid stowing) or may be built at regular intervals
with wastes usually shales etc.
Fig. 2.2 shows a longwall layout with gateways. As soon as the edges of the shaft pillars are
reached a continuous face is formed to which access is gained by “gateways”. These are
maintained through the “goaf” by ripping the roof, of denting the floor. The stone so obtained is then
used to build roadside pack-walls which support the roof in the gateways and provide a substantial
bed on which the whole body of overlying strata may gradually subside and come to rest. The line of
the face should be straight and parallel to the main cleats i.e. (board ways). It makes easier to get
coal. Face line may be at right angles to the cleat (on end) when it is under cut by hand and shot
down by explosives.
When the gateways are advanced to a certain distance, they are cut off by cross-gates, C.C.C. to
0
reduce the number and length of the roads to be kept open. The cross-gates may be at angle of 40
0 
to 60 to the gateways but they are sometimes at right angles. The distance between them should
be such that ventilation at the face is provided adequately. With reference to the above figures, it is
Page | 10

--- Page Break ---

evident that theoretically, a similar face could be arranged on all sides of the shafts so increasing
possible output.
Application of Long wall Advancing Method:
Long wall advancing method is applicable for:-
1. Thin coal seams.
2. Seams which contains dirt bands.
3. Coal seam is hard but has a weak roof and floor.
4. Seams lying at a great depth where excessive crush or creep may occur.
5. Gassy seams, ventilation in long wall advancing is simpler than in pillar method.
6. Seams liable to spontaneous combustion provided suitable precautions are taken.
7. Seams in close proximity.
Advantages of the Long wall Advancing System:
1. Full production may be attained rapidly, with little development work;
2. A maximum degree of extraction can be achieved;
3. Subsidence is even and regular over the working area and a high degree of roof control can be
obtained by suitable methods of packing or caving.
4. The method lends itself to intensive mechanization and a large output can be obtained from a
relatively small area;
5. Good ventilation can be more readily maintained that in pillar methods of working.
Page | 11

--- Page Break ---

Disadvantages of the Long wall Advancing System:
1. A relatively large number of men are employed for unproductive work (ripping, packing and
roadway repairs);
2. Conventional methods require a rigid cycle of operations (cutting, filling, packing) each of which
must be completed before the next can proceed and only one productive shift per day can be
worked.
3. Except on cutter loader faces large numbers of men are often grouped together and pool their
earnings so that a good team spirit is not fostered and may be lacking.
4. Large quantities of stone from rippings have sometimes to be sent to the surface or to another
area.
5. The area to be worked is not proved in advance.
6. Roadway maintenance and repair in the moving ground behind the face may be difficult and
costly.
7. Materials and equipment must be salvaged quickly when the face reaches its boundary to avoid
serious losses.
2.2.2.ii Long-Wall Re-Treating:
A long-wall retreating system combines the method of working of both the proceeding systems.
Narrow roadways are first driven forward in the coal to some predetermined distance so forming
large pillars. These are then extracted by a long-wall face with retreats towards the main roadways
from which narrow heads were taken. In this case, no packs are built behind the retreating face but
hard wide packs are built to protect the face itself.
Figure 2.3 shows a sketch of long-wall retreating system. In this case two pairs of developing roads
AB and CD are driven northwards from the main intake and return and are interconnected at
intervals for ventilation. At the boundary, similar roads are driven at right angles (east and west) to
connect the two pairs. Very rapid development may be achieved by using arch wall or short wall
coal cutters and some form of power loader loading on to conveyors, the work being carried out on
two and possibly three shifts per day.
At the boundary, a long-wall conveyor face is opened out and is worked back southwards as far as
EF, the present position of the face being at XY. The face itself is supported by props and bars
supplemented generally by one or two rows of chocks behind which the roof breaks down, little or
no packing being required.
Such a panel of workings may be 80 to 220 yards wide and any number of panel may developed to
suit the output required. When each panel is worked, the entrances may be sealed by stopping to
prevent access of air and eliminate danger from spontaneous combustion.
Sometimes the entire panel is split up into pillars. The pillars being extracted by a retreating long
wall face. In such cases the face may be carried obliquely across the pillars to avoid their all being
extracted simultaneously across the full width of the panel.
Application / Advantages of Re-Treating Method:
1. The area to be worked is pre-explored by the development roadways;
Page | 12

--- Page Break ---

2. No gob roads are required to be kept open and the cost of packing is greatly reduced;
3. Thick seams may be extracted in a series of lifts;
4. The goaf left behind is not subject to the ventilating pressure so that the risk of air
leakage and self heating is reduced;
5. The degree of extraction is high and comparable to that obtained by long wall
advancing;
Disadvantages of Re-Treating Method:
1. The method pre-supposes that the narrow development roadways will stand well without
excessive pressures being developed therein during the life of the panel;
2. If the goaf does not close readily, if may become filled with large volumes of gas which may
prove troublesome when the barometric pressure is reduced or when the goaf roof eventually
falls.
2.2.3 Horizon Mining:
Horizon mining is a system of mining, applicable to inclined or undulating seams and also to
relatively flat seams where these occurs in groups in this system all the coal seams are extracted
between pre-determined horizons, levels or planes.
Horizon method of mining involves driving main road-ways horizontally through the measures or
strata from the shaft at pre-arranged intervals of depth. These road ways form the main arteries of
the mine through which coal is transported
throughout the life of the mine.
Page | 13

--- Page Break ---

The steps involved in it are:
1. To driven main cross-measures drifts, XF and YE respectively from the shafts in the direction
of the full dip of the strata to intercept the seam at points F and E.
2. The upper drift XF forms the main return airways and the lower drift YE forms the main intake
airway for the first area of the coal to be worked namely ABCD on the plain.
3. The air will pass down the down cast (DC) shaft, along drift YE, thence ascending up the
seam from E to F and so to the up-cast (UC) shaft via drift XF.
4. The vertical intervals between the two drifts vary in different cases according to the dip of the
beds, the numbers of seams to be worked etc.
5. The next step in the case under consideration is to drive lateral level roadways EC and ED in
the seam (shown in the plan) from point E at right angles to the main drift YE.
6. The roadway CED represents the main intake conveyor level for the first pair of working
faces, the loading point into the tubs or mine cars being at E.
7. The seam may be opened up by one of two methods as such given below:-
a) The first method is to drive a main centre gate in the seam direct to the full rise from E,
with two companion return airways which connect up with the main return drift at F. From
these rise roadways, other intermediate level gate roads, GK, GL, HM, HN, FA, and FB (in
succession) are opened at right-angles, so dividing the area ABCD in to three strips.
b) The second method is to drive the rising return airways and the intermediate level roads
as before but to dispense with the centre gate and drive vertical staple pits, RH and SG,
upwards from the main intake drift YE to pierce the seam at points H and G.
In both methods, each strip of coal is worked in the usual way by long wall advancing and along the
strike of the seam with the faces on the line of full dip and rise. The coal is conveyed down the faces
to the loading gate at the lower and namely to ED and EC for strip (1) GK and GL for strip (2) and
HM and HN for strip. (3).
For strip 1, the coal is then conveyed along the bottom level to the loading point at E from which it is
taken to the shaft by locomotive haulage.
In the first method, so far as strips 2 and 3 are concerned, the coal after reaching G and H, is
conveyed down the seam and then to point E.
In the second method, however the coal after reaching G and H, is delivered to a spiral conveyor
situated in each of the staple pits and is loaded into tubs in the main intake drift at S & R.
It is generally considered better to adopt the staple pit arrangements which cuts through the strata
and follows the shortest route from the seam to the main haulage road.
If stowing material is required at the faces, it is sent down the UC shaft and taken via the main
return drift to point F and from where it is transported by conveyors to the rise-end of the faces.
When the area ABCD is exhausted, the lateral roadways ED and EC may be extended in both
directions to open up further areas of coal, similar to ABCD, on either side between the same two
horizons. The number of such panels of workings will obviously depend on the lateral distance to
which the coal seam extends or is to be worked.
Page | 14

--- Page Break ---

When all the coal between the first two horizons has been extracted (or rather whilst extraction is
taking place) another main intake cross-measures drift ZT is set out from the DC shaft at a lower
level to intercept the seam at a point lying to the dip of E. The lower area of coal between the
second and third horizons is then worked in a similar way to ABCD, drifts ZT then becomes the new
main intake and drift YE the new main return for that area.
Later, a fourth and fifth horizon may be opened up at greater depths if the reserves of coal warrant
the cost of development.
These are summarized as follows.
1. Efficient transport, usually by means of locomotives.
2. Minimized repair costs on roads as they are driven in the solid.
3. Ventilation is accessional and the length of airways is fairly constant.
4. Worked out area can be sealed out easily.
5. Seams in groups (i.e. more than one) and highly inclined can be worked efficiently.
6. The system permits large output of coal to be won from each cross-measure drift and then
delivered to a single, central, fully mechanized loading point.
Disadvantages of Horizon Mining:
1. The cost of development is heavy.
2. The method is applicable where seams are in groups, seam variations are much more and
the main industry of the country runs on coal.
Page | 15

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-03
DEVELOPMENT OF COAL SEAM
3.1 Introduction:
Coal seam in a mine may be approached by driving tunnels, inclines and shafts from the surface.
The process of development takes place earlier than the exploitation or both may be continue
simultaneously.
3.2 Conditions Governing the Development:
The mode of entry by tunnels, drifts, vertical or inclined shafts, depends upon:-
1. Topography.
2. Effect of inclination of coal seam.
3.2.1 Topography is a naturally or artificially created surface features of the land. This includes villages,
streams, lakes, tunnels, roads and cities.
Topography is also the science of making an accurate and detailed drawing of such features.
Effects of Topography:
Generally there are three types of topography: flat, slightly rugged and rugged. Slightly rugged
topography includes hilly areas where hills are rounded and valley’s floors are wide enough. Rugged
topography is either mountainous or hilly with steep sided hills and narrow valley floors.
The topography affects the types and location of the opening as well as the transportation system.
3.2.2 Effect of Inclination of Coal Seam:
Coal seams are classified as flat, moderately dipping or steeply dipping.
0  0
The flat seam dip from 0 3
0  0
Moderately dipping seam dip from 3 30
0  0
Steeply dipping seam dip from 30 90
If the area is flat and seam is also flat and depth is considerable the shaft sinking is preferable. If
area is flat seam is flat and depth is not considerable the drivage of inclines should be preferred. If
area is flat, seam is steeply dipping then inclines in rock or in seam should be preferred. If seams
are highly dipping, tunnels can also be driven from shaft to connect the seam at various depths or
levels.
Page | 16

--- Page Break ---

3.3 Development of Coal Based on Entry System.
3.3.1 Single Entry System:
A single entry system is shown in Fig. 3.1. It is driven from which rooms are turned off in one or both
directions. The entry acts as a main haulage-way and intake airway. The circulation of ventilation is
also shown in the fig. Any blockage in the main entry would endanger the life of the persons working
and life of the mine itself.
3.3.2 Double Entry System:
Fig 3.2 shows a system of Double Entry. In double entry system main entries are driven from the
shaft or from the surface. Cross entries are then opened and the main haulage way is also used as
an intake.
Page | 17

--- Page Break ---

3.3.3 Advantages of Double Entry System Over Single Entry System:
1. In case of an accident in any entry, the other provides an escape.
2. The mine is divided into two separately ventilated sections. One serves for the intake of air
and the other for the return airway.
3. Cross entries may be driven ahead and ventilation can be maintained at a suitable level
without difficulty.
3.3.4 Triple Entry System:
Fig 3.3 shows a Triple Entry System. The middle entry serves as the main intake and haulage way
and the other two serve as return.
This system is well adopted in gaseous mines of large working areas.
3.3.5 Quadruple Entry System:
Fig. 3.4 shows a Quadruple (four) entry system. In this case, four entries are driven in parallel. Two
act as main intakes and two as main return airways. One intake entry may be used as a travelling
way, and the other as a haulage way or both as haulage ways.
This system provides circulation of large volumes of air and is well adapted to high speed endless
rope haulage.
Page | 18

--- Page Break ---

3.3.6 Quintuple Entry System:
In this system five entries are used, two for intake two for return and fifth middle one for travelling. It
is the same as the four entry system but with addition of one more entry used as travelling way.
3.4 Factors Effecting Size of Entries:
Factors affecting size of entries are enlisted below:-
1. Size of Pillars.
2. Ventilation required.
3. Purpose of entry.
4. Local Conditions.
5. Production Level.
6. Life of Mine Expectancy (Expected life of Mine)
3.4.1 Size of Pillars:
Size of pillars depends upon the depth of seam, strength of the coal, nature of roof and floor, depth
of the seam and other local factors. Size of pillar must be sufficient to prevent thrust which may
crush the coal between strong roof and hard floor. Size of pillars must also be such so as to prevent
creep which may be caused due to soft floor. An approximate rule is to make the pillars at least 20
yd sq. for a depth of 100 yd. The size of pillars a increased by 05 yd for every increase of 100 yd in
depth. Thus at depth of 500 yd size of pillars might be 40 yd sq.
In case of entries main entries are driven on 30-60 ft centres, leaving a 10 ft entry, 20-50 ft will be
the size of pillar.
Cross entries on about 30 ft centres for 10 ft entry, the size of pillar will be 20 ft.
3.4.2 Ventilation Required:
The minimum quantity of fresh air at which men can work comfortably depends on the maximum
velocity of air current. An adequate ventilation is that in which men and animal can work comfortably
and which ensure the dilution of noxious gases to such a percentage that it does not affect the
human being or animal while on work.
In coal mine quantity of fresh air prescribed is generally from 100 to 150 cubic ft per minute per man
and 200 cubic feet per minute for each horse or mule in the mine. Atleast 30 cubic ft of air per
minute must be supplied to every individual.
3.4.3 Purpose of Entries:
The size of entries depends on two factors.
a) Entry must be large enough to ensure adequate ventilation. It must be preferably square in
shape as it reduces friction of air flow. In haulage ways height and width must be according to
the size of tub and mode of haulage.
b) This factor is important for size of entries in their use for different purposed. If mechanized
haulage is required in entries then they must be wide and sufficient in height to adjust the
Page | 19

--- Page Break ---

equipment. In case the roof is not very good then entries can not be very wide and belt
conveyor system is adopted.
3.4.4 Local Condition:
If the roof is bad or the floor has tendency to heave or if the coal is friable and easily crushed then in
such cases maintaining wide openings may be costly.
In such situation narrow entries are best or preferred in seams that contain more or less waste, the
entries are driven 16 to 20 ft wide and then narrowed to 6 to 10 ft by building the waste into a pack
wall along one of the ribs as shown in Fig. 3.5. In the transport of waste is eliminated.
3.4.5 Production Level:
The yield or output of a mine at certain level is called production level. The optimum size of entries
provides a suitable production level.
For wide entries mechanized haulage system may be adopted. Similarly for narrow entries belt
conveyor system is adopted. All these factor re considered in determining the production level.
3.4.6 Lie of Mine Expectancy (Expected Life of Mine)
It is a statistical measure of the average age and number of years that a group of mine may expect
to exist or continue.
Large pillars are required to protect main entries during life of mine.
3.5 Distances Between Entries:
Main entries in flat seams are driven on 30-60 ft centre, leaving for a 10 ft entry, and 20-50 ft pillar.
Large pillars are required to protect main entries. Cross entries should not be opened if the area
served is exhausted.
However they are on about 30 ft centre, leaving a 20 ft pillar for 10 ft entry. For economy, entries
should be as close together as possible to reduce cost of passage through the pillar for ventilating
current.
3.6 Factors Affecting Direction and Location of Entries.
3.6.1 Shape of Property:
Square properties are bisected by the main entries to provide cross entries of equal length.
Page | 20

--- Page Break ---

If property is of considerable size two or more sets of main entries may be necessary. Rectangular
shaped properties of sufficient width are bisected along their length by one set of main entries.
3.6.2 Cleavage Planes in Coal Seam:
Cleats in coal influence the direction of entries. Main entries are usually driven face on (‘face on is
the working of a mine in a direction parallel to natural cleats’) while cross entries are driven butt on
(‘butt on is opposite of face’). That permits the rooms to be driven face on and results greater
percentage of lumps.
3.6.3 Dip of Coal Seam:
0
Flat seam usually have 3% (2 ) dip in one direction or another. The layout of the mine should be so
that the dip is in favor of the loads both on the main haulage way and in room.
0
In dipping seams where the coal dips more than 3% (2 ), the main entries are usually driven up or
down without considering the cleavage.
3.6.4 Geological Formation of Seam:
If coal lies in a syncline or an anticline, main entries should be driven in the synclinal trough, thereby
making the grades in favour of the loads on the cross entries.
Anticline hills of sufficient width may have two sets of main entries driven on the anticline limbs.
Experience should govern the planning of the layout under such condition.
3.6.5 Amount of Water:
The direction and location of entries depends upon the amount of water.
If the amount of water is more than direction then location of entries shall be changed.
Page | 21

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-04
LONGWALL MINING METHODS
Longwall Mining Methods are;
1. Longwall advancing by Mechanical Means
2. Longwall re-treating by Mechanical Means
3. Manually worked Longwall Mining Method
4.1 Longwall Advancing by mechanical Means:
On mechanized longwall face, a cycle of operations covering 24 hours period is usually established
and combines as follows:-
a) Coal cutting, drill holes and shot-firing-known as the coal preparation shift;
b) Waste filling and erecting face support.
c) Moving over face conveyors, ripping, packing and drawing supports from the wastes known
as the turning over and packing shift.
The completion of each phase of the cycle in the scheduled time is essential for smooth working of
the cycle.
It is sometime found advantageous to modify the above cycle in seams with a soft floor i.e. cut the
coal before building the packs, otherwise props near the face penetrate the soft floor and causes an
abnormal roof lowering when the undercut is made. Normally, however, it is advisable to build the
packs before the coal is cut.
Good alignment is essential to provide good roof control to maintain cutter and conveyor tracks,
straight.
4.1.1 Sketch:
Figure 4.1 shows a sketch of a coal face on longwall advancing system in flat seam.
Page | 22

--- Page Break ---

Application:
This depends upon.
a) The Position of the Cut:
The position of the cut depends upon the conditions where the seam rests. On a soft clay
floor, the cut is made in the floor. This minimizes the amount of crush but it is usually found
that if the undercut is made in the coal a better breaking off line in the coal at the back of the
cut is obtained. In the case of hard floor the cut is usually made in the coal. In thin seams,
where the conditions permit, a thin kerf jib giving a cut 4.5 inches high is often used.
The normal chain gives a cut 6 inches high. Where a band of dirt or inferior coal occurs in the
seam it is often cut and discarded.
In cases where roof beds are weak it is often advisable to form a cut leaving up a portion of
the seam. Where the formation of coal roof is not possible, the coal is over-cut.
b) The Direction of the Coal Face:
When the under-cut by machine is “on end” i.e. at right angle to the main cleat it results in
larger coal. In each case experience dictates the best direction for the face line and it is often
advisable to “swing” the face line to a suitable angle to the cleat.
c) Depth of Cut:
This is governed by the thickness and nature of the seam and the nature of the roof and floor
beds. In seams 2.58 ft thick, depth of under-cut is usually from 6 ft to 6.5 ft.
d) Length of Face:
This also varies according to the conditions such as thickness of the seams, gradient and
limitations imposed by the loading capacity of face conveyors. Single unit faces served by
two roads are usually up to 100 yards or more in length while in double unit faces served by
three roads may by 200 to 250 yards in length.
4.1.3 Development for Flat Seams:
Fig. 4.2 illustrates a layout of single unit face in a seam 3 ft. thick under cut to depth of 4.5 ft.
Page | 23

--- Page Break ---

Each face is 110 yd. long and development faces are 80 yd in length. On the basis of one ton per
cubic yard the total yield per 4.5 ft cut on all faces would be 1560 tons.
a) Roof Control and Mechanical Packing:
The work of packing and drawing off support is one of the most important phases in the cycle of
operations, as the provision of adequate roof control depends largely upon the quality of the work
done in these operations.
Mechanical means have been evolved for the packing process. In one method crushed stowing dirt
is conveyed in pipes to the goaf by compressed air. Mechanical stone throwers are also used.
b) Machines used for Coal Getting:
In addition to the system of mechanical cutting and breaking down the coal for loading by explosives
or other means machines are now in use which simultaneously get and load the coal e.g. A.B Meco
More cutter loaders, the Longan slabbing machine, the Joy-Sullivan, Gloster getter, the coal plough
and the M & C Samson Stripper. The development of such machines has brought revolutionary
changes in increasing the production of the coal.
The coal cutter can give about 10 tons per man/shift to the loading point whilst the loading machine
gives an average from 5 to 6 tons per man shift. These figures are based on 200 yd long face and of
course will vary according to the conditions.
The roof control plays an important part in mechanical loading operations and the less the span of
roof to be supported between packs and the solid coal the better cutting and loading operations. The
span of supported roof between packs and solid coal should be as less as possible.
4.1.4 Development for Inclined Seams:
0 
Seams of moderate inclination i.e. upto about 20 or 1 in 3 are usually worked by ordinary methods.
Page | 24

--- Page Break ---

In the longwal advancing system, faces may be on the line of strike with gates on the full rise, as
shown in 4.3. The level from which the faces are formed are usually driven as breasting with packs.
Breasting may be 15-20 yd. wide. Substantial packs are built on the rise side of the level and are
rein-forced with wood chocks.
Where conveyors are used, gates are often on line of strike with the faces on the line of inclination.
In this arrangement gradient on the face should not exceed 1 in 3 unless some retarding
arrangements is provided on the conveyor system.
Seams of Steeper Inclination:
Seams having gradient more than 20 degrees are usually worked with stepped faces. The face line
being on or near the line of full dip and the gates on the line of strike is shown in 4.4. The main or
loader gate is, of course, at the lower end of the face. Where coal cutting machines are used,
0  0 
auxiliary safety ropes are used and at inclination exceeding 30 to 35 the coal will slide of as own
momentum down conveyor chutes.
Page | 25

--- Page Break ---

1.2 Longwall Retreating, by Mechanical Means.
4.2.1 Sketch:
Fig 4.5. shows a development face for longwall re-treating.
Page | 26

--- Page Break ---

Application:
In spite of its advantages, this system of working has not been applied extensively, due to the
amount of heading work required in the development of working faces. This draw-back can now be
overcome by the use of modern equipment in coal headings, by means of which development work
is accelerated.
The area to be worked by then this method is divided up into panels. The heading are driven to the
extremity of each panel and then connected by a cross-heading. From this a coal face is formed
worked on the retreat to the roads from which the headings started.
The size of panels is governed by the conditions for example where there is a likelihood of
spontaneous combustion; the panel will be restricted in size, possibly to form one retreating face. In
other cases a series of stepped faces may be worked so as to form a roof break line to facilitate roof
control> the tendency so far has been to favor a layout of single unit face upto about 150 yd in
length.
As the roads are in solid coal, their maintenance is much less costly than that of the coal roads in
the longwall advancing system. The strata conditions must be such that the roads will not suffer the
effects of crush or creep. Development faces about 20 yd in length may be driven.
Figure above shows 60 ft development faces for longwall retreating utilizing shortwall coal cutter and
hand filling on to scraper chain conveyors. Slit (S) and return (R) can be dinted or ripped as
necessary to provide packing.
As the goof area is left behind, it is usual to cave the roof beds behind the working face where
conditions permit. It is generally necessary, however to build goaf packs opposite roads serving the
faces to provide the necessary roof control.
Page | 27

--- Page Break ---

1.3 Hand-worked long-wall Mining Method.
Sketch
Figure 4.6 shows a sketch of hand-worked longwall advancing face.
4.3.1 Application:
The original method of longwall advancing by hand involves undercutting or over cutting the coal by
hand pick and loading it into tubs or on conveyors. The face line is usually on near the line of main
gate. The line between gates roads is restricted to 30 to 40 yards.
Fig. shows the development of hand worked face from the shaft pillar. Gate side packs only are
shown. When the face has advanced a predetermined distance cross-gates are made. The line of
the cross gates is marked on the roof of the center gate and the former is ripped to the required
height and the stones are packed on each side. The surplus stone is disposed of in the roads cut off
by the cross-gate. By this means the length of roads is reduced resulting in lower haulage and road
Page | 28

--- Page Break ---

maintenance cost. The distance between cross-gates varies according the conditions from 50 to 250
yards.
4.3.2 Development:
Fig. 4.7 illustrates a hand-worked stall in seam 4 ft 10 in. thick at a depth of 200 yd. The coal is
undercut by hand to a depth of 5 or 6 ft. Temporary supports are set near the buttock until sufficient
coal is worked off to allow for the insertion of props and bars at regular intervals. Flat sheets and
rails are laid as shown. The coal is worked off to left and the right of the stall gate to the point
midway between gates.
In thin seams face conveyors were usually installed on the coal face where tubs could not be taken.
Hand getting of coal is usually combined with conveyors transport system. The conveyors used for
coal transport at the face are (1) Scraper Chain (2) Shaker or jigging Conveyors (3) Belt Conveyors.
The belt conveyor is the most widely used. These are usually 26 to 30 inches wide and are
“troughed” so as to centralize the load and to minimize spillage.
Page | 29

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-05
ROOM AND PILLAR MINING METHOD
5.1 Application
The Room and Pillar Mining Method is applicable when:-
i) The coal seam is lying at moderate depths
ii) The coal seam is fairly thick i.e. more than one meter
iii) The seam is relatively clean i.e. free from dirt
iv) The coal is not friable as to be crushed badly in pillars.
v) The roof and floor are quite strong.
vi) The angle of inclination is not too high.
vii) The area is reasonably free from faulting and other geological disturbances.
5.2 Phases of Operation:
The operation in a mine can be split up as follows:
1) Under Cutting
2) Face Drilling.
3) Blasting.
4) Loading.
5) Roof Bolting.
5.2.1 Development of Rooms and Entries:
Where the conditions are suitable, this system is highly productive, especially where fully
mechanized. The amount of stone work is very much less than in the longwall system.
Sizes of Pillar:
This is governed by the following factors.
i) Depth of coal.
ii) Nature of the coal.
iii) Roof and floor beds.
iv) The time interval between pillar formation and extraction.
v) The dip of the seam.
Pillar size increases with depth and in hand worked area; they are from 20-40 meters. In
mechanized areas in which pillar formation and extraction is more rapid, their sizes are often less
Page | 30

--- Page Break ---

than the value given. In the formation of pillars upto 20 percent coal may be worked by manual
methods and upto 40 percent by mechanized.
Width of Heading:
In order to secure a good yield of round coal in the formation of pillars, headings should be as wide
as possible and in accordance with pillar size and nature of the roof and floor. The main headings or
rooms are usually driven at right angles to the direction of the main cleat of the seam. The cleat in a
coal seam is the natural cleavage or jointing which produces planes of weakness at right angle to
the bedding planes.
Room or main headings may be 3-4 meters or even 5 meters wide whilst the walls or cross-
headings are often 2-3 meters wide headings are often narrowed at junction to minimize the crush at
pillar corners as shown in figure below (5.1)
Page | 31

--- Page Break ---

5.2.2 Pillar Mining – Depillaring:
A view of Pillar Mining shown below as figure (5.2)
Road A, B, C are shown as travelling, haulage and return airways roads. The panel is separated
from the main roads by a barrier of solid coal. Entries to the panel from these roads are also
indicated in the figure.
Within the panel itself, the pillars are formed by driving roads. The formation of pillars is called the
first working. The work of removing the pillars comes later and is called-pillaring or simply pillar
working or pillar extraction.
Points to Note:
1. Roads driven at right angles to the main cleat of coal are termed “bords” whereas roads
driven parallel to the cleat of coal are terms ‘walls’ or ‘headings’.
2. The coal in a bord is easier to get and they are usually driven wider than walls.
3. The roof of the walls is usually better than in bords. It is because that in bords, the coal sides
of the road are ‘on end’ and therefore strong. On the other hands, in walls, the coal sides are
“On face” and therefore weaker and permit the roof to descend slightly and relieve itself of
load. The total loads are thus distributed for some distance over the solid coal in the case of
walls and roof conditions are thereby improved.
Page | 32

--- Page Break ---

5.3 Method Development of Entries and Room:
These vary with the area and shape of the deposit it is proposed to work according to, condition
underground, mechanical equipment proposed to utilize and the idea of Mining Engineers In-charge.
What may be suitable in one case may be quite un-suitable in for another. The possibility of the
development of entries room may be:-
1. The Block System.
2. The room and entry system-partial extraction.
3. Room and entry system-Full extraction.
The Block System:
This method is very similar to that used in the bord and pillar workings of the north of England. It is
particularly applicable under relatively adverse conditions of roof or floor or where the coal is of a
friable character, the development roadways being driven fairly narrow and the pillars being made
large enough to prevent the coal being crushed.
Fig. 5.4 illustrates a typical panel of workings arranged on the block system. The panel is formed by
driving the (more) main development roads (Main entries) from the incline or shaft and thereafter
driving side development roads (face entries) in pairs or in threes at right angles upto pre-
determined boundary. The size of panel may be upto 400 meters long and 300 meters wide long.
The entries are protected by barrier pillars of solid coal upwards 20 meters wide.
Within the panel the coal is divided into long rectangular strips (say 50 meters wide) by pairs of
room entries from which are driven the development room which split the area into square pillars of
Page | 33

--- Page Break ---

suitable size 10 to 20 meters. Later when a sufficient number of pillars has been formed extraction
of pillars is proceeded with care being taken to maintain a diagonal goal line which makes for better
control of roof-breaks and provides some protection for the adjoining working place.
5.3.2 The Room and Entries System Partial Extraction:
This method may be adopted in areas where the roof and floor are fairly strong and surface
subsidence or fracture of the higher roof strata, must be avoided. It is stated that 40 to 50 % of the
coal may be extracted without causing subsidence.
As in the previous case, panels of coal are formed by means of the main and side development
roads and from these are driven panel development roads (room entries) in pairs or three for
transport and ventilation. These entries may be 5 meters wide or so.
From one or both sides of the room entries (according to the gradient) rooms are formed, usually
starting with narrow ‘necks extending or some 3 to 5 meters and then opening out to between 6 and
15 meters wide, according to conditions. The necks maybe at one side of the room (as shown on
the left side Fig. 5.4) or in the middle (as shown on the right side of Fig.) depending on the kind of
equipment to be used and its location in the room.
Page | 34

--- Page Break ---

The ribs of coal between the rooms may be 6 to 15 meters wide and are holed through at intervals
for ventilation. The length of a room may be 100 meters or so, a rib of solid coal being left against
the end of the rooms to separate the panel from the neighbouring section.
The rooms may be formed as the entries so as to achieve maximum concentration of work.
Alternatively when roof conditions are more difficult, the room entries may be driven to their limit
(possibly 400 or 500 meters) and the rooms formed on the retreat.
5.3.3 The Room and Entry System-Full Extractions:
In mines worked by the room and pillar system, it is not possible to achieve complete extraction of
all the coal and 80% or more extraction is considered to be full extraction.
Fig. 5.5 shows a typical layout for full extraction, the room entries (in pairs 100 meters apart) being
driven upto their limits before the rooms are formed. The rooms may be 6 to 8 meters wide and the
pillar 12 to 15 meters wide. Thereafter the pillars are removed by lifts or cross-cuts driven through
the pillars in such a way as to maintain a stepped fracture line along the goaf. A fender of solid coal
is usually left on the waste side of each lift in order to give protection and timber is withdrawn and
the roof caved on completion of each lift.
Page | 35

--- Page Break ---

5.4 Advantages of Room & Pillar System:
The primary advantage is that when applied, it can result in a higher output and higher OMS is
obtainable due to the following factors:-
1. A larger proportion of the working is engaged on actual coal getting, during both the
development and the extraction stages.
2. The amount of dead work (ripping and packing) is reduced to a minimum or even eliminated
altogether.
3. The men work in small teams or independent groups, each member of which is a key worker
preferably capable of performing the duties of any member of the crew with the result that a
better team spirit is fostered and keenness and efficiency is increased.
4. The work is highly concentrated and supervision is rendered easier.
5. The cycle of productive operations can be repeated several times in one shift in each working
place and is not dependent on the completion of right 24 hours cycle as in longwall working
where coal cutters and conveyors are used.
6. Two or even three, coal getting shifts per day may be arranged.
7. The area to be worked is pre-explored by the narrow development head ways.
5.5 Disadvantages of Room and Pillar System:
1. The percentage of extraction is usually less than in longwall mining a matter of some
importance in country where the resources of coal must be conserved. Nevertheless, high
percentages of extraction, of the order of 90% or even 95% should be possible with a suitable
layout of the workings.
2. Adjacent seams are likely to suffer more damage than in longwall mining where goaf is well
packed and it may be more difficult to work subsequently.
3. Surface subsidence is less effectively controlled than in longwall mining, except where the
coal is only partially extracted and pillars are left in for support.
The goaf of lifts or juds is usually supported by means of wooden chocks which are withdrawn and
re-set as each lift is taken. Between the wooden chocks and the pillar, side props and bars are set
shown in Fig. 5.8.
5.6 Precautions in Robbing Pillars:
i) Pillars should be extracted so as to form a diagonal goof line at an angle of 45 degrees
across the pillars under extraction this helps in caving of the roof along the line of
extraction otherwise the coal in pillars left behind shall be difficult to get.
ii) Pillars should be worked off in slices know as lifts or juds. This reduces a large
expense of unsupported roof.
iii) Extraction of pillars soon after their formation results rounds coal and less crush and
creep and sweeping off noxious gases.
Page | 36

--- Page Break ---

5.7 De-Pillaring:
There are two general methods of depillaring or pillar extraction.
1. Extracting pillars as they are formed.
2. Extracting pillars after a panel has been completely headed out.
3. Pillar formation at the in-bye and of a panel and to follow its extraction on the retreat.
5.7.1 Figure 5.6 shows a panel in which pillars are extracted as they formed.
5.7.2 Figure 5.7 shows pillar extraction on the retreat after all the pillars in the panel have been formed.
Page | 37

--- Page Break ---

5.7.3 Figure 5.8 shows the re-treating method of pillars formation and extraction.
Large pillars are often split into two halves by means of a heading across the centre of the pillar.
From this, heading lifts or juds are taken at left and right as shown in Fig. 5.8. The lifts at the bottom
of the pillar are extracted in the order shown to facilitate roof control.
Page | 38

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-06
SURFACE COAL MINING METHODS
6.1 Introduction:
The Process of extracting minerals from the earth crust by removing the over burden is called
surface mining. Surface mining methods are large scale mining method having high rate of
production.
6.2 Classification:
Surface mining methods are classified as;
 Open Pit Mining.
 Open Cast Mining.
6.3 Open Cast Mining Method:
The Process of extracting mineral from the earth in such a way that crew (workers) and extracting
equipment remain at the surface is called open cast mining method. Open cast mining methods
reduces haulage cost and the need for a large dumping point. The over burden is re-deposited in
the spaces created by the removal of the minerals.
6.4 Open Pit Mining Method:
Exploitation in which mining of coal or stone is carried out on at the surface with essentially no
exposure of miners underground is referred to as surface mining. While openings may sometimes
be placed below the surface and limited underground development work is occasionally required.
It is an elaborated mining method because a lot of material (over burden) has been transported from
one place to the other. It also requires a large space for dumping the material, which creates
environmental problems.
The main features of Open Cast Mining Method which make it most popular all over the world are as
under:-
1. It eliminates the haulage cost because over burden removed is not transferred to a dumping
point as it is re-deposited to the mined out place.
2. Due to the elimination of haulage of over burden the mining activity is confined to the limited
area and reclamation can be made immediately after the mining.
6.3.1 Application:
In the United States open cast mining is used almost exclusively for surface mining of coal.
6.3.2 Sequence of Development:
To develop a mining project certain steps are required to be adopted. These steps/operations are
very basic in nature and are related to both surface and underground mining method.
1. Preparation of feasibility report which provides the basis for the planning of the project.
Page | 39

--- Page Break ---

2. Confirmation of mining method and general mining plan.
3. Arrangement of finance on the basis of cost estimates provided by the feasibility report.
4. Acquisition of land including mineral rights.
5. Filling of environmental impact statement.
6. Provision of surface access transportation, communication and power supply to the mine site.
7. Planning and constructing of surface plant.
8. Installation of Mineral Processing Plant.
9. Selection of suitable mining equipment.
10. Construction of main access and other necessary openings.
11. Recruitment and training of labour force and provision of support services.
6.3.3 Cycle of Operation:
The cycle of operation in open cast mining depends on the nature of over-burden which is to be
removed from the top of the coal and then re-placed after the removal of the coal. Soil and
decomposed rock can be excavated easily without any prior breakage. Whereas consolidated rock
mass requires drilling and blasting. Very weak rock may be removed by ripping prior to excavation.
The drilling method is also a function of over burden material. For a soil or very weak rock Auger-bit
rotary drilling is used whereas for intermediate rock roller bit and for hard cork percussion drill is
used.
6.3.4 Condition Suitable for Open Cast Mining:
Open cast mining method is applicable to a large, low grade, nearly horizontal, fairly uniform tabular
bedded deposit with shallow depth, and variable strength of ore and rock.
Advantages:
1. Highest productivity of any broadly used mining methods; low intensity labour and
replacement of haulage with casting results in high output (U.S. average for coal 500-1000
tons, or 450-900 tons, per face employee-shift, including both coal and waste; average for
clean coal 35 tons, or 31 tons, per gross employee-shift).
2. Lowest cost (along with open pit mining) of broadly used methods (large equipment and
ability to cast over burden minimizes operating cost).
3. High production rate, near maximum output of all methods.
6.4 Auger Mining:
Auger Mining is a surface mining method used for the recovery of coal from its outcrop by boring or
excavating openings into the seam beneath the overburden. Although the overburden is not
removed, and the coal is extracted by an auger or a mining machine working underground, the crew
operating the machine is located at the surface, hence we classify it is surface method. In most
applications, augering is a supplemental method used in conjunction with open cast mining, it
accounts for < 2% of U.S. surface mineral production. Augering is intermediate in production rate
and productivity, falling between a large-scale and a small scale mining method.
Page | 40

--- Page Break ---

Coal is generally extracted by an auger consisting of one, two or three boring heads. More elaborate
mining machines may also be used. A coal auger works on the principle of a large scale drag bit
rotary drill. No prior breakage of the coal is required and the auger extracts and removes the coal
from the hole, where it is elevated by conveyor or loaded by front-end loaders into trucks. A form of
continuous miner, the coal auger is a relatively simple, inexpensive machine that is easily moved,
operated by a small crew (three to four persons).
Because the augers bore a circular hole, the cutting head and flight diameter must be chosen to be
compatible with the seam thickness. Consequently, recovery is low (40-60%). To improve
productivity and recovery, augers with multiple heads are used, especially in thin seams.
6.4.1 Application:
All applications of auger mining are confined to the production of bituminous coal in mountainous
areas and in conjunction with open cast (or open pit) mining.
6.4.2 Sequence of Development:
Developing and preparing a site for auger mining is a simple task if it is used with open cast or open
pit mining. Practically no additional development is required for augering. For access and
transportation, a haul must be constructed near the site, if not already available. If augering mining
is being carried out on the outcrop, then dozing to clear a vertical mining face in the seam as well as
to provide a level bench and access for the auger is necessary.
6.4.3 Cycle of Operations:
No stripping of overburden is required in augering. Because removal of over burden from the coal
seam in the highwall or at the outcrop has already occurred. During operation of the auger, the
following abbreviated production cycles takes place.
Excavation: Auger (1, 2 or 3 heads).
Haulage: (1) auger flights, (2) conveyor or loader (3) truck.
No auxiliary operations, other than advanced trimming of the highwall and cleaning the pit floor, are
necessary.
6.4.4 Conditions Suitable for Auger Mining:
Auger mining method is applicable to small, thin low grade, nearly horizontal tabular uniform bedded
deposit with shallow depth and variable strength of ore and rock.
Advantages:
1. High productivity, among the highest of any mechanical extraction surface methods (25-500
tons, or 22-450 tonnes, per employee shift).
2. Low mining cost probably the lowest of any mechanical extraction surface method (relative
cost 5%).
3. Intermediate production rate (1000-2500 tons, or 990-2200 tonnes, per shift).
4. Little ore development required, when used in conjunction with open cast mining.
5. Low labor requirement (crew three to four).
Page | 41

--- Page Break ---

6. Low capital investment. May require purchase of auger only.
7. Surface preserved, no separate reclamation cost incurred.
8. Recovers coal that would otherwise be lost.
9. Good health and safety; no underground hazards.
Disadvantages:
1. Application is strictly limited to certain conditions associated with open cast mining; method
rarely employed alone.
2. Application is restricted to small remnants of coal at pit limits and boundaries (maximum
length 300 ft, or 90 m; maximum height 8 ft or 2.4 m).
3. Low coal recovery (40-60%).
4. Production capability dependent on single extraction unit.
6.5 Strip Mining.
6.5.1 Stripping Ratio-Break Even Stripping Ratio:
The stripping ratio of a pit is the ratio of overburden actually removed to the mineral mined out. The
over burden ratio is the ratio of vertical thickness of over burden to the thickness of the mineral to be
mined out and it should be used for the extraction of bedded deposits.
Depending on richness of ore nature of over-burden, quality of the ore, and extent of deposit, the
stripping ratio may go upto 20 to 1 or occasionally more. This usually needs an extensive shallow
deposit and large machinery. On a steep deposit the mine may extend very little beyond a ratio 1 to
12 to 3 to 1, before going underground.
6.5.2 Strip Mining with Shovel:
The larger sizes of shovels and draglines are electrically powered and generally use Ward-Leonard
control for hoist and swing motors to give accurate position and speeded control. An a.c. motor
generator set provides the d.c. current for the motors. Modern solid-state devices are replacing d.c.
generators in smaller new equipment to give improved performance. A surface mine may have to
reticulate electrical power at 11 kV, or even up to 35 dV, to the working areas through carefully
protected rubber-sheathed trailing cables, and plan its day to day activities around the cables. On
site power generation is avoided where possible because of higher costs. The larger machines can
carry diesel generators if necessary.
Page | 42

--- Page Break ---

Fig 6.1 shows the operating principle of a power shovel. There are three motions on the shovel.
1. Dig, by pulling on the rope that goes over the end of the boom to the bucket, thus lifting it
through the rockpile.
2. Crowd or push by rolling the dipper down past the boom. This force the bucket into the
rockpile as it moves forward.
3. Swing, to take the bucket round and empty it through its back door.
On the older machines pulling and the boom lifting were rope operated and a boom-mounted motor
provided the crowding action. The use of hydraulic operation is spreading and several smaller
shovels now have hydraulic rams to provide boom lifting, a hydraulically operated knuckle-joint
dipper stick, and a hydraulic bucket tilting action. All these combine to give the dig and crowd action.
3 
Shovels upto about 23m are now available with a hydraulic boom-dipper knuckle and a rope hoist
for the boom.
The crowding action of the dipper stick and its heavy, stiffiy-mounted bucket give a shovel a much
3
stronger loading breakout force than either a dragline or a front-en loader. For instance a 4.6 m
3
power shovel has a breakout force of about 90 tones, whereas a 7.6m loader has a breakout force
of 35 tones. Consequently a shovel can breakout soft shale and coals without blasting, and also
give a smoother bench surface.
A shovel will dig down below grade (i.e. below track level) to about half its dipper stick length and
upto about two-thirds its boom height. The hydraulic shovels can go down to
Page | 43

--- Page Break ---

about full dipper length and upto above boom height; a manufacturer’s table will give the exact
dimensions.
Normally a shovel runs on the floor level it digs for itself and works only from that height up. A
bulldozer of size appropriate to the shovel is kept for cleanup duties and floor grading. The shovel is
not sufficiently mobile to perform its own cleanup, and ground bearing pressures have to be kept to
a minimum by providing a smooth path under the crawler tracks.
6.5.3 Strip Mining with Dragline:
As show in Fig. 6.2 the smaller draglines will generally run on crawler tracks but the larger walking
draglines sit on their tub (base of the body) for operation. This is to keep the ground bearing
pressure to a minimum. For tracked operation of shovels or draglines the crawlers are kept as broad
as possible and may be twinned for operation on soft ground. Ground bearing pressures are usually
limited to 60-150 kPa.
Open cast draglines normally work on top of a high wall that has been drilled and blasted. The
broken ground is bulldozed flat to avoid large rocks buckling the tub plates. The whole machine can
0 
rotate through 360 relative to its tub.
It is interesting to note that on the large machines with a boom length of 80 to 95 m the average
speed of the bucket, which may weigh over 100 tonnes, is 48 km/hr, for a normal swing cycle.
Page | 44

--- Page Break ---

Large draglines move by walking on a pair of shoes; an eccentric or a hydraulic mechanism lifts the
tub up and propels the dragline forward between the shoes, and then cycles the shoes forward for
another lift. Direction changes are made by swinging on the tub with the shoes in the air.
Because the ground will be either soft enough for unaided digging, or will have been drilled and
blasted, it is essential that the dragline should have a firm base to prevent it sliding into the pit or
sinking into the ground. If the layer of overburden immediately below the topsoil is not sufficiently
strong to take the enormous working weight then the dragline may have to stand on a lower stratum.
This is not desirable because a dragline is designed to work below grade, filling its bucket by pulling
it in with the main dragline. When filled the bucket is lifted with the hoist rope, keeping some tension
on the dragline. On releasing the dragline the bucket will drop and empty. If the dragline has to work
above grade (called chopping down) its efficiency is reduced by about 20 percent.
6.5.4 Strip Mining with Bucket Wheel Excavator:
These are often abbreviated as BWE. Their main use is on soft coals or overburdens and on
stockyard reclamation in bulk materials handling. These are essentially continuous feed machines
and are designed to give a high output in soft materials. Both originally worked with rail truck loading
but on new installations it is more usual to feed directly on to a conveyor. A typical installation is
shown in Fig. 6.1.
The main working parts of a wheel are the bucket or digging wheel, ladder belt, and stacker belt.
The bucket wheel varies in diameter size, depending upon the overall size of the machine and its
Page | 45

--- Page Break ---

desired capacity, and has a number of digging buckets equi-spaced around it. The capacity of each
bucket varies with each machine model and may be from 1/3 to
6 cu yd.
The crowd or mechanism that pushes the digging wheel against the overburden bank may be either
of two types. One type uses cables to pull the digging wheel against the bank. The other type has
no crowd mechanism and uses the propel crawlers to push the digging wheel against the bank.
When digging, the bucket wheel is swung against the overburden bank with the wheel rotating, so
that the buckets are digging and lifting. As the digging wheel is rotating, it is swung from side to side,
excavating arcs into the bank. As one arc is finished, the digging wheel is lowered to a new level
and then begins excavating a new arc. This continues until the depth to which the wheel is to dig is
reached. The digging wheel is lifted to the top of the bank, and the wheel either crowds further into
the bank or moves up to repeat the operation at the next “bite”.
The buckets dump onto the ladder belt as they pass the vertical point. The ladder belt then conveys
and dumps the overburden onto the stacker belt. The stacker belt then conveys the overburden to
the dumping point and dumps it into the spoil bank. The stacker belt is usually of such length that it
dumps the spoil far beyond the reach of even some of the largest draglines and shovels.
The bucket wheel excavator, because of its relative structural weaknesses, is restricted to moving
soft overburden. This would include top soils, sand, clay, and light shale. Heavier materials in the
bank may damage the bucket teeth, the buckets themselves, and the conveyor belts.
Page | 46

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-07
OXIDATION OF COAL AND SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION
7.1 Introduction.
7.1.1 Oxidation:
Oxidation of coal is largely responsible for the depletion of oxygen and the increase of carbon
dioxide in the mine air.
In oxidation some of the oxygen combines chemically with the carbon of the coal to form carbon
dioxide, and some combines with the hydrogen to form water. In some cases small quantities of
carbon monoxide may also be produced. These are purely chemical reactions:-
GENERAL CONDITIONS FAVOURING OXIDATION:
1. Low Carbon Content:
Coal containing upto 85% of carbon is liable to oxidation. Anthracite coal has fewer chances
to oxidation.
2. Bright Coals:
The bright coals e.g. vitrain and clarain are more prone to oxidation than dull constituents e.g.
durain, fusain.
3. Presence of Iron Pyrites:
The sulphides of iron when undergo the process of oxidation swell up and disintegrate the
coal so the coal becomes permeable and helps in oxidation.
4. Presence of Moisture:
Moisture itself does not assist oxidation of coal but its presence is essential for the oxidation
of pyrites and it accelerates disintegration of the coal.
5. Friable Coal:
Friable coal which readily breaks into small pieces is more likely to self heat than hard coal.
6. High Temperature:
Increase of temperature helps in oxidation. First the coal is ignited and then starts burning.
7.1.2 Spontaneous Combustion:
Spontaneous combustion may be defined as the self heating of coal or other carbonaceous material
resulting eventually in its ignition without the application of any external source of heat.
7.2 Situations Liable to Spontaneous Combustion.
They are:-
Page | 47

--- Page Break ---

i) Thick Seams:
Seams exceeding one meter in thickness are more liable to self heat than thinner seams
because coal is a bad conductor of heat as compared with shale and sand stone.
ii) Deep Seams:
Seams lying at great depths are more liable to self heating. The strata temperature increases
due to depth and pressure and the process of oxidation is accelerated.
iii) Seams Containing Bands of Inferior Coal:
Thin layers of dirt and possibly having a roof of carbonaceous shale, are prone to self
heating. The inferior coal bands and dirt are often left underground and the shale itself
oxidizes after falling in the wastes.
iv) Loosely Packed Goaf Containing Small Coal and Other Carbonaceous Refuse:
This forms most usual site for self heating to occur. The air percolates through the coal to
cause oxidation, which is most likely to occur near the face where the packs have not
become consolidated.
v) Sites of Old Falls:
The easiest way to start a gob fire is to leave a small pillar of coal, with a few pieces of
timber, in the goaf, behind the advancing face. Such stocks of coal and timber pieces shall
cause oxidation.
vi) Edges of Solid Coal Pillars and Ribs:
These are also liable to self heating if crushed and fractured.
vii) Faults:
They are also the main cause of self heating because inferior coal is sometimes left next to
the line of faults which agitates the cause of self heating.
7.3 Common Sites of Heating
They are:-
7.3.1 Face Starting Lines (Near the Face):
This forms the most suitable site for self heating of coal due to flow of inadequate air current in the
working faces.
When sufficient amount of air percolates through the coal it causes oxidation and when this air is
heated it generates heat and help in the combustion of coal.
7.3.2 Road Side Packs:
Road side packs contains pillars of coals, when air passes, it breaks and falls and so causes
oxidation.
Page | 48

--- Page Break ---

7.3.3 Deep Seated Waste Heating:
These are more liable to self heating because the shale and other wastes present in depth when
gets insufficient quantity of air self heating starts taking place.
7.3.4 Finished Faces (Edges of Solid Coal Pillars and Ribs):
Due to the superincumbent pressure they are crushed and fractured and form the site of heating.
7.4 Detection of Spontaneous Combustion.
Symptoms of Self Heating:
The development of self heating is accompanied by “Haze” Sweating “Stink” and finally fire.
7.4.1 Sweating:
It is due to the condensation of moisture and its deposition as beads on the cooler surfaces e.g.
roof, sides, timbers and metal surfaces etc.
7.4.2 Haze:
It is due to the moisture given off during oxidation. It is condensed as small globules in the cooler air
away from the heating.
7.4.3 Smell:
Faint odour, known as “gob-stink”, oily or sometimes sweet or sometimes like the smell of decaying
timber can help detect it.
7.4.4 Hot Surfaces:
A large variety of ignition can be included under this heating:-
i) Over Heated Lamp Gauzes:
If fire damp becomes ignited within safety lamp gauze it may continue to burn there
indefinitely, even the oil flame extinguished. With lamps having two gauzes, there is a high
margin of safety and the possibility of external inflammable atmosphere is limited inside the
lamp.
ii) Electrically Heated Wires:
The tungsten filament of an incandescent electric lamp is quite capable of igniting a fire damp
air mixture if the enclosed bulb should be accidentally broken.
iii) Heating Rock Surfaces:
Continued friction between certain kinks of sand stone can generate sufficient heat to ignite
fire damp. Under practical conditions such friction may occur when a large mass of rock falls
some distance and glides along the sharp edges of another piece. It has also been found that
the friction of rock upon rock is more likely to cause ignition than that of metal upon rock. It is
quite possible to ignite fire damp by the glancing blow of a pick on quartzite sand stone.
Page | 49

--- Page Break ---

iv) Incandescent coal:
Danger of ignition from this cause is only liable to occur in those mines where the coal is
subject to self heating or spontaneous combustion. Ignition of fire damp may occur before the
coal actually fires i.e. at the stage where the exposed surfaces of the coal become
incandescent.
v) General:
Several other causes of ignition under the heading of heated surfaces e.g. over heated brake
blocks, timber and steel props, moving conveyor trough, un-lubricated haulage roller heated
by rope friction and so on.
7.4.5 Smoke:
Smoke coming out from any underground working may not be a symptom of self heating.
Concentration of Carbon Monoxide:
In the application of gas analysis to the detection of a heating it is first essential to ascertain the
CO/O2 ratio. This may vary from about 0.1% in some cases to as much as 1% or slightly more in
others. Any increase in the ratio indicates the development of heating. Broadly, a ratio exceeding
1% demands careful watching; a ratio of 2% indicates distinctly dangerous conditions; whilst a ratio
of 3% or more is a generally definite indication that fire exists.
7.4.7 Routine Analysis:
It is generally agreed that analysis of the return air is no substitute for the regular inspection of
underground working by specially trained and competent officials. Some go so far as to say that
“There is no scientific instrument equal the nose” of a human being.
Under favourable condition; however, gas analysis may be a more positive and reliable means of
detection by a skilled practical observer.
7.4.8 Detector Tubes:
Detector tubes are also one of the important sources to detect the percentages of noxious gases in
mine atmosphere. It is fitted with a rubber pump which by pressing directly indicates the percentage
present in the atmosphere.
Continuous Analysis:
The continuous analysis of mine atmosphere only can ensure the safety of underground working. It
must be understood that in any mining air sample, the ratio Co2/O2 depends on the breathing of men
and animals, the burning of lights, the decay of timber and oxidation of iron pyrites. In these cases
the ratio of CO/O2 remains nil. In the case of oxidation of coal, a variable amount of both CO2 and
CO is produced depending on how long the coal has been exposed to the atmosphere and on the
temperature of the material. At normal the CO2/O2 ratio is only about 45 and the CO/O2 ratio being
about 0.5%.
With old mines the CO2/O2 ratio rises to about 20% and the O/O2 ratio upto 2%.
Page | 50

--- Page Break ---

Example
A mine atmosphere in the return air way and in seam liable to spontaneous combustion shows gas
analysis as under:-
Carbon dioxide = 0.39%
Methane = 0.93%
Oxygen = 19.95%
Nitrogen = 78.72%
Carbon monoxide = 0.005%
Find CO2/O2 ratios.
Sol: We know that percentage of gases in normal air is as under
O2 = 20.93%
N2 = 79.04%
CO2 = 0.03%
The %age oxygen in relation to 78.72 parts of nitrogen = x 78.72 = 20.85%
Oxygen absorbed = 20.85-19.95 = 0.9%
CO2 produced = 0.39-0.03 = 0.36%
%age of oxygen absorbed = 0.36/0.9 x 100 = 40%
CO produced = 0.005% = 0.005/0.9 x 100 = 0.56%
7.5 Remedial Techniques:
7.5.1 Digging Out
This is preferred in mines where it is only possible:-
1. The heating or fire is easily accessible.
2. It has not attained appreciable dimensions.
3. There is no danger of fire damp.
4. The roof is good.
5. The mine is non-gassy.
This method is applicable where the heated place can be located and removed before actual fire
develops.
7..5.2 Roadway Lining:
If the heating has occurred in the goaf, one or more headings must be driven through the packs
from the intake side to the seat of trouble. The ventilation should be restricted as much as possible.
Sufficient air must be directed to the place of operation to dilute the noxious gases given off and
render it safe for the men to work. The heated material should be covered with sand and inert dust.
Page | 51

--- Page Break ---

It is then filled into steel tubs and sent to the surface. Glowing or burning material may be treated
with portable fire extinguishers. When the material has all been removed, the fire area should be
packed with sand and stone packs. One or more canaries or other means of detecting instruments
for carbon monoxide alongwith breathing apparatus should be available for use, if necessary.
7.5.3 Cement, Nitrogen Injection:
If a heating has occurred in the main road pillars, one of the methods is the injection of liquid cement
under pressure. This method is successfully applied to the strata overlying and adjoining roads
where heating has been a source of prolonged trouble and anxiety.
7.5.4 Sealing:
If the foregoing methods of local sealing or digging out the heated material become impracticable
due to the extent or inaccessibility of the heating, the entire area must be sealed off by means of
permanent stoppings.
The important points to be considered while erecting stoppings are:-
1. This should be in firm well supported ground.
2. It should be conveniently accessible for the transport of material and for subsequent
ventilation and balancing of air pressure on the out-bye side.
3. In a non-gassy mine, the area sealed off must be as small as possible.
4. In a gassy mine, it is generally desirable to build the stoppings well back from the site of the
fire so as to have a long column of air between the fire and the stoppings.
5. During the erection of stoppings, the air supply should be maintained as near as possible
until the stoppings are finally closed. It shall help the workmen to work safety.
Figure 7.1 shows one type of a permanent stopping. It consists of a series of brick walls. Between
the brick walls, the places are packed with sand packs. Two steel ventilation tubes are inserted in to
the stopping to maintain the air supply upto the last moment. The ventilation tubes may be closed by
pulling a previously prepared sand bag plug into the in-bye end (as shown in the fig.)
Page | 52

--- Page Break ---

The final wall is then built up rapidly and all the men are withdrawn. Later, if desired, the stopping
may further be strengthened by a further stopping on the out-bye side. An air sampling pipe, say 0.5
inches diameter with valve should be build through the stopping to permit air samples from behind
the stopping to be taken for analysis.
7.6 Prevention:
Precautions to Prevent Spontaneous Combustion:
All precautions must be focused on:-
a) Reducing the quantity of crushed coal that is available for oxidation and
b) Preventing the access of air to the crushed material.
They may be listed as follows:-
1. Where practicable, completely extract all coal by the long wall system either advancing or
retreating. Maintain a straight line of face.
2. Advance the face rapidly and continuously allowing the goaf to be packed effectively.
3. Form large pillars in room and pillar method of working and extract them rapidly.
4. Avoid leaving stooks of coal in the goaf. If a fall occurs at the face, all the coal should be
removed and place packed with inert material.
5. Build wide road side and rib-side packs with inert material.
6. Withdraw all props. Whether of steel or wood from the goaf.
7. Keep intakes and returns as far apart as possible and seal all leadage’s between them.
8. Drive straight room airways so as to allow an adequate amount of air current to flow at a low
water gauge.
9. Build all doors, stoppings, air crossings and regulators in strong, unbroken ground in order to
prevent leakage of air around them.
10. Avoid “bottle necks” in road ways, so as to smooth air current to flow.
11. Tightly pack all disused road ways and seal off worked out places properly.
12. No time should be lost as and when first signs of incipient heating is suspected.
7.6.1 Air Tight Packing:
If the packing is not air tight, it may cause an explosion of the damp or coal dust to take place. We
should be very careful to note the leakage of air from behind a stopping or stoppings.
The air may leak from the following points in a working mine:-
1. Leakage at the roof, sides and floor of a mine.
2. Leakage through door, air crossings, regulators and stoppings.
3. Leakage from two or more driven parallel roadways.
4. Leakage from the worked out area.
Page | 53

--- Page Break ---

The essential factors to consider for selection of sites for stopping are:
1. The safety of the personnel building the stopping.
2. The complete stoppage of air flow in the sealed area.
3. The time required to build the seals. It should be as short as possible.
4. The men should wear breathing apparatus if stopping are being built in an irrespirable
atmosphere.
The leakage can be prevented by closing the strongest possible ground for building the stoppings
and make them as much air tight as circumstances permit.
Page | 54

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-08
MINE LIGHTING
8.1 Definition of Relative Terms.
8.1.1 Candle Power (CP):
This defines the luminous intensity of a light source. For comparative purposes, the most
convenient standard is an electric lamp, the C.P of which has been tested at National Physical
Laboratory.
The intensity of light emitted by a light source varies in different directions, depending on its shape
and effect of lamp fittings. The reflectors may increase C.P in one direction but it may decrease the
light in other directions.
Mean Spherical C.P.
The mean spherical C.P is the average of all the candle powers measured in all directions from the
source and is a true measure of the total light energy available.
Mean Horizontal C.P.
The mean Horizontal C.P is the average of all the candle powers measured in all horizontal
directions from the source.
8.1.2 The Lumen:
This is a unit of Luminous flux emitted by a light source. Consider a light source of one C.P placed
2 
at the centre of a sphere which has a radius of one foot and a surface area of 4π r  = 4π sqft. The
light will radiate its light energy in all directions and the amount of energy falling on each square
foot is called a Lumen. The total energy of flux radiated by on C.P is thus 4π lumens and therefore
lumens emitted by a lamp = mean spherical C.P x 4π.
The lumens output of a lamp naturally depends on its type and size; but it is of the order of 22 to
24 Lumens for modern cap lamps, 24 to 32 lumens for electric hand lamps, 1100 lumens for a 100
watt,, 200 volt, gas filled lamp and 3,000 lumens for an 80 watt, 5 foot, 230-250 volt, fluorescent
tube.
8.1.3 Foot Candle:
This defines the intensity of illumination received from a light source, and one foot candle is the
illumination produced by one C.P at a distance of one foot. If the C.P is increased, the illumination
will be increased in proportion, and if the distance is increased, the illumination will be decreased
in proportion to the square of the distance.
Candle power of a Light Source
Illumination of a surface in foot candles = 
2
(Distance in Foot)
1 ft-Candle is the illumination produced by 1 C.P at a distance of 1 ft and also 1 C.P at a distance of
1 ft causes one Lumen of flux to fall on each sq. ft of surface.
Page | 55

--- Page Break ---

No standards of illumination have been specifically laid down or mines, but following desirable
levels of illumination should be aimed at:-
1. Pit Bottoms. 6-10 Lumens per sq. ft.
2. Main junctions. 4-6 Lumens per sq. ft.
Landings, loading points.
3. Roads 200-400 yds away from pit bottom. 2-4 Lumens per sq. ft.
4. Other illuminated roadways 0.5 Lumens per sq. ft.
5. Coal face. 0.4 Lumens per sq. ft.
8.1.4 Luminance or Brightness of an Illuminated Surface:
This depends on the illumination in foot candles and on the reflection factor of the surface.
Luminance is expressed in foot-Lamberts.
Luminance in ft-Lumberts = illumination in ft-Candles x reflection factor.
Reflection factors range as follows:-
Polished Silver = 0.9
White blotting paper = 0.8
White washed surface = 0.5
Light coloured stone dust = 0.25
Shale dust. = 0.05
Coal dust. = 0.05
Reflection factor can be improved by whit washing.
Example: Find the intensity of illumination (a) under each lamp and (b) midway between the lamps on
the floor of a roadway, which is equipped with 100 c.p. lamps mounted at a height of 8 ft.
and at intervals of 10 yd along the centre line of the road. Illustrate your answer by a sketch.
Roadway Illumination:
In the adjoining sketch, X and Y represent two 100 c.p. lamps mounted 8 ft. above the floor AB and
30 ft, apart. C is the point midway between and angle XCD=Ø is the angle of incidence of the
oblique rays XC and YC from the normal.
= =
Page | 56

--- Page Break ---

8.2 Lamps used for Lighting:
Following lamps have been in use for lighting purpose in mines:-
1. Flame Safety Lamp.
2. Electric Safety Lamp.
3. Pneumatic Electric Lamp.
8.2.1 Flame Safety Lamp:
In past, flame safety lamps served the double purposes of providing light and enabling officials and
workmen to test for fire damp and deficiency of oxygen. Presently they are being used almost
exclusively for gas testing purposes only. The use of electric safety lamps for lighting purposes has
intensively increased.
Principle of the Flame Safety Lamp:
An oil flame safety lamp consist essentially of an oil flame surrounded by a single or more wire
gauze cylinder with glass and outer bonnet and lower portion serves as oil vessel. The wire gauze
plays the most essential part in the safety of the lamp in an inflammable fire-damp air mixture.
The main purpose of the wire gauze is not to let the flame pass through it to ignite the inflammable
gas if present in outer atmosphere. The gauzes used in safety lamps are of steel or best charcoal
annealed iron wire of either 28 meshes or 20 mesh.
The advantage of the more open gauze is that it tends to improve the ventilation of the lamp and
increase its candle power. The type of fuel used in safety lamps is mineral oil distilled from
petroleum and of various densities and flash points.
8.2.2 Electric Safety Lamp:
a) Hand Lamps.
b) Cap lamps.
Page | 57

--- Page Break ---

In either case the electric current is being supplied through batteries or accumulators, of following
types:-
i) Lead acid.
ii) Alkaline cells.
The former being the more widely used.
Page | 58

--- Page Break ---

8.2.2.1 Lead Acid Electric Lamp (Oldham-Wheat Lead – Acid Cap Lamp)
It is a typical lamp of the lead acid type. It is a 2 cell, 4-volt lamp consisting essentially of:-
a) Two lead acid cells connected in series and assembled in a hard rubber container which is
carried on the miner’s back. The container is fitted with a stain less steel lid secured by a
special sealed screw.
b) A locked head piece made of moulded plastic to be fixed to the miner’s helmet carrying the
bulb and reflector assembly.
c) A flexible, two core, rubber insulated, sheathed cable, to connect the battery to the head
piece.
The voltage of a single lead acid cell is 2 volts so that the two cells must be connected in a series
to give a 4-volt lamp.
The head piece of the Oldham lamp is fitted with two bulbs (main & pilot bulbs) and a selector
switch is used for using either of the bulbs. The bulbs are krypton filled for high efficiency.
The lead acid cap lamp is designed for a self service system, in which the miner puts his lamp on
charge in the lamp room & removes it himself, charging takes through contractor on the head
piece. All the lamps are connected in parallel on the charging rack & charged on a constant
potential system low voltage d.c. (5 or 6 volts) being obtained from a transformer rectifier unit.
Each cell of lead acid battery is immersed in a 30% solution of sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and distilled
water.
In Oldham lamp, the positive element is of tubular construction, the negative element is of flat plate
construction and the insulating separators are of highly absorbent type of wood called sponac,
which absorbs 85% of the total acid in the cell to make the battery unspillable.
Page | 59

--- Page Break ---

8.2.2.2 Alkaline Cap Lamp (Ceag):
Alkaline cap lamps resembles the lead acid type lamp in its construction, but it is completely
different in is mode of operation.
The Ceag Cap Lamp is a 3-cell, 3.75 volt alkaline lamp, the battery is housed in a stain less steel
container with a lid, which is spring locked and is magnetically unlocked. The head piece is either
of moulded Bakelite or of stainless steel and is fitted with either a single main bulb rated at 3.75
volts, one ampere or with both a main bulb and a smaller pilot bulb.
An alkaline cell consists of a number of plates of nickel steel immersed in a 20% solution of
potassium hydrate (Caustic Potash KOH). The active material in the positive plates is nickel
hydroxide and that in the negative is iron or cadmium oxide or mixture of two. A single alkaline cell
gives and E.M.F. of about 1.25 volts the three cells must be connected in a series to give a 3.75
volts.
Lead Acid Versus Alkaline Lamp.
Lead Acid Battery:
Advantages:
1. Lower first cost (Half that of its alkaline equivalent).
2. Higher electrical efficiency.
3. Lower cost of re-plating.
4. Safety in handling.
Disadvantages:
1. The battery may be spoiled by prolonged over charging or prolonged idleness.
2. Plates require renewal every 18 to 24 months.
Alkaline Battery:
Advantages:
1. Long working life (7-8 years) without renewal.
2. Lower maintenance cost.
3. Ability to withstand adverse treatment i.e. overcharging, excessive discharging short
circuiting, or prolonged idleness without damage.
Disadvantages:
1. Severe flesh burns may be caused by spilled caustic electrolyte.
2. Modem lamps are designed to eliminate the trouble as far as possible.
8.2.2.3 Pneumatic Electric Lamps:
It is a convenient source of light in places where a high standard of lighting is required, and where
compressed air is the only source of power available or where electricity could not be used
because of danger of fire damp explosions.
The general arrangement of such a lamp is shown in Fig. 7.4.
Page | 60

--- Page Break ---

It consists of a small turbo generator driven by compressed air and running in ball bearings. There
are no rubbing contacts in the generator to produce sparking. A reducing valve is fitted which
reduces the air pressure supply to 40 Ibs per sq. inch. The lamp interior is in connection with the
exhaust, an air pressure of about 2 Ibs per sq. inch is maintained by a spring loaded valve, which
prevents the access of fire damp to the interior. In addition, a safety device is attached to cut off
the current if the internal pressure fails due to breakage of the glass or any other reason.
Compressed air is fed from main pipe range through a control valve to the pneumatic electric
lamps.
8.3 Colliery Lamp Rooms:
8.3.1 Purpose.
The main and essential purposes of a colliery lamp room are to provide:-
i) A well designed, well fit lamp room, equipped with all necessary apparatus for unlocking,
cleaning, charging, repairing, accommodating and lighting lamps.
ii) Adequate staff of well-trained attendants under the control of a competent head lamp man.
iii) A well organized system whereby all lamps pass through a regular routine of inspection,
cleaning, recharging and final testing before being reissued for use underground.
iv) Careful record from which the history of each lamp may be checked, having regard to any
damage it may have sustained, and any repairs or renewals it may require.
v) Routine tests to ensure the prescribed lighting efficiency to be maintained.
Now mostly, as far as the cap lamps are concerned, the lamp rooms are designed on the self
service system.
Page | 61

--- Page Break ---

8.3.2 Advantages & Disadvantages of Self Service Lamp Rooms:
The main advantages of a self service lamp room are:-
1. The lamp room staff is free from unnecessary handling of the lamps and has more time at
its disposal for attending the more important duties of maintaining the lamps, overhauling,
testing and attending the complaints.
2. The number of staff in lamp room can be reduced without affecting the quality of
maintenance work in lamp room.
3. The queuing of men at lamp issuing windows is avoided.
4. The men are likely to take a greater personal interest in the operation of their lamps.
5. The lamps are not subject to the same rough handling that they receive at the lamp room
windows with the hand issuing system, the wear and tear due to dismantling and re-
assembly.
Perhaps the only disadvantage of the system in a full self service system is the possibility of a
damaged or faulty lamp being put on charge by a workman and taken under ground the following
day without the defect having being reported or the lamp being examined by a competent person
as required by regulations.
Page | 62

--- Page Break ---

8.3.3 Maintenance of Safety Lamps.
a) Essential Requirements:
Essentials are properly designed and fully equipped lamp room with adequately trained staff and a
regular routine of inspection photometric testing and record keeping. The responsible post of head
lamp man should be held by efficient, competent and experienced person. One quarter of the
lamps being tested each week and whole installation once every month so that any defect
discovered being remedied at the time.
b) Flame Lamps:
The maintenance of flame lamps is largely a matter of cleanliness, proper assembly and thorough
examination by the lamp room staff. Damaged lamp should be removed at one to the repair room.
Damaged gauzes should be destroyed at once. Lamps designed to be lit electrically should be lit in
the lamp room before being taken under ground. Lamp glasses should be air tight, wick adjuster
should be working freely and lamp should be properly locked.
c) Electric Lamps:
These lamps require more skilled attention especially the battery and the bulbs, and the makers’
instructions must be carefully adopted.
Important points are:-
i) The batteries should be topped up only with distilled water upto correct level every 7 to 10
days.
ii) The tops of the batteries and the terminals and contact plates should be kept clean and
spread with Vaseline.
iii) Charging must be carried out at the correct voltage specified by the makers. Lead Acid cells
must never be left in a discharged condition.
iv) Only approved bulbs of correct rating should be used, being replaced after about 600 hours
of burning or when photometric tests indicate that the light output is below standard.
v) If a lamp fails during use, the steps to be taken in order are to test the bulb, check the
switch and internal contact in the head piece, exmine the cable for the effects, and check
the battery. Any replacement of plats in the battery should be carried out by the makes.
Page | 63

--- Page Break ---

8.4 Main Lighting Underground.
8.4.1 At the Pit Bottom and Main Haulage Junctions:
A high standard of brightness of light is required and arranged in such a manner that haulage
workers do not stand in their own light, deep shadows are not cast and glare is avoided. The
illumination should be of 6 to 10 lumens per sq ft at pit bottoms and 4 to 6 Im/sq ft at haulage
junctions. These figures are rarely reached. The solution lies in (i) the use of lamps of sufficiently
high candle power but low natural brightness and (ii) closer spacing. In additions, all the
surroundings must be kept in a whitened condition to improve reflectivity factor.
8.4.2 Lighting at the Coal Face:
The working height at the face is generally restricted and is impracticable in seams less than 3 ft
thick to provide light from main. The space in the space in the face is limited along with equipment
on a mechanized face because there is risk of damage to lighting fittings. The whole fighting
installation must be capable of being moved forward daily as the face advance. At face a high level
of illumination up wards of 0.4 lumen per sq ft is mostly needed to enable efficient work to be
carried on and to reduce the risk of accident. Main lighting on the face has been adopted in seams
where shot firing is not required.
The single phase supply for main lighting at the face is obtained from flame proof transformer
switch. The transformer may be of 2 to 5 KVA output, and cable may be a 4 core trailing or
armoured cable carrying two power cores, an earth core and a pilot core. The lamp fittings are
connected to the cable by 4 plug and socket connectors which makes the equipment to be
dismantled easily and re-assembled daily as the face advances. In general, the lamps on the face
are connected electrically in parallel, and are spaced at intervals of 4 to 6 yds. They may be
arranged in one of the two ways:-
i) Straight-through Coupling System
In which a number of lam units are connected mechanically in series by plug and socket
connectors, forming a fixed line extending along the face. The disadvantage of the system is that, if
any lamp fails and has to be removed or replaced the whole face goes in darkness until a new unit
is installed.
ii) Wander lead System:
Main lighting cable is mounted for protection behind the face conveyor, but 3 yard lengths of cable
(the wander leads) are teed off the main cable at intervals of say 12 ft, each lead is fitted with a
lamp which can be moved to the most required position in the working area. If one lamp fails,
supply to other is not interrupted and next lamp can be moved closer to maintain brightness at that
point.
Even where face lighting from the mains is installed, it is still necessary to provide additional light
from cap lamps in order.
i) To penetrate deep shadows in the working area at the start of the shift.
ii) To raise the general level of illumination towards the end of the shift to provide light to
ensure safety of workmen in the event of failure of the main lighting system.
Page | 64

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-09
FUELS
9.1 Introduction:
A fuel is combustible substance containing carbon as main constituents. Proper burning gives large
amount of heat that can be used economically for domestic and industrial purposes.
Wood, coal, coke, charcoal, petroleum and natural gas are some examples of fuels.
9.2 Classification of Fuels:
They are classified as:-
1. Solid fuels.
2. Liquid fuels.
3. Gaseous fuels.
Difference between Natural & Artificial Fuels:
Natural or Primary Fuels:
Which are found is nature such as wood, coal, Petroleum and Natural Gas.
Artificial or Secondary fuel:
Which are prepared from the primary fuels such as coke, charcoal, tar, kerosene oil, diesel oil, coal
gas, producer gas & water gas.
The table given below shows the division of natural or primary and artificial or Secondary fuels.
Sr. No. State f existence Natural or Primary Fuels Artificial or Secondary fuels
1. Solid Wood, coal Coke, Charcoal
2. Liquid Petroleum Tar, kerosene oil, diesel oil
fuel oil, petrol etc.
3. Gaseous Natural Gas Coal gas, blast furnace gas,
water gas, oil gas, coke gas
9.2.1 Solid (Natural or Primary) Fuels:
These are:-
i) Wood
ii) Coal
Page | 65

--- Page Break ---

i) Wood:
Wood is obtained from forests. Freshly cut wood contains 25 to 50% moisture. It is reduced
to about 15% on air-drying.
The average composition of wood on dry moisture-free-basis is as follow:-
C-50%; H=6%, O=43%, Ash=1%. The calorific value of air-dried wood is about 3500-4500
Kcal/kg.
Wood burns readily producing long and non-smoky flames and it leaves behind a very little
amount of ash. Wood is largely used as a domestic fuel.
ii) Coal:
Coal is a highly carbonaceous matter that has been formed as a result of alteration of
vegetable matter (e.g. plants) under certain favourable conditions. It is chiefly composed of
C.H.N. and O besides non combustible inorganic matter. The formation of coal is not an
instantaneous process but is extremely lengthy, spread over a long span of time. Millions of
years ago when the temperature was moderate and rain fall was heavy, vegetation was quite
thich especially in low lying areas of earth. Under the combined effects of high pressure and
bacteria, plants got converted into coal.
Classification of Coal by Rank
Various types of coals are commonly recognized on the basis of rank or degree of alteration or
coalification. It ranges from:
Wood Peat Lignite Bituminous Anthracite Coal
9.2.1.1 Solid Artificial or Secondary Fuels.
They are:-
i) Coke
ii) Char coal
i) Coke:
When bituminous coal is strongly heated in absence of air the volatile matter escapes and a
white lustrous strong porus and coherent mass is left which is called coke. This process of
preparing coke from coal is known as carbonization of coal.
The most important industrial use of coke is in the metallurgical industry especially in the
blast furnace.
Properties of Good Cokes:
1) Purity:
It should have moisture, ash, sulphur and phosphorus contents as low as possible.
Page | 66

--- Page Break ---

2) Porosity:
It should be porous so that oxygen can easily come in contact with the carbon of coke,
thereby helping in complete combustion at a high rate.
3) Strength:
The coke should be quite compact, hard and strong to withstand dropping abrasion as well as
the pressure of the overlying solids (ore + fuel + flux) in the furnaces.
4) Size:
The size of metallurgical coke should be neither too big nor too small.
5) Cost:
It should be cheap and easily available near the site of metallurgical plant so that the
transportation cost is low.
6) Reactivity:
The reactivity of coke can be defined as the rate of combustion. A good metallurgical coke
should not be too reactive. Lower the reactivity, higher the calorific intensity and hence better
the fuel value.
7) Combustibility:
Coke should burn easily.
8) Calorific Value:
The calorific value of coke should be high.
ii) Charcoal:
Charcoal consists mainly of amorphous carbon and ash, (Amorphous carbon is carbon
made of tiny, irregularly arranged particles of graphite a form of pure carbon). It contains
small amounts of impurities such as sulphur and hydrogen compounds.
Types of Charcoal:
The two most common types of charcoal are:-
a) Wood Charcoal:
This is made from wood.
b) Bone Charcoal:
This is made from animal remains.
Activated charcoal is a charcoal from which most of the impurities have been removed.
Manufacturers make it by treating ordinary charcoal with steam and air heated to above 600
0 0 
F. (316 C).
Uses of Charcoal:
Wood charcoal is the most widely used. Small chunks of wood charcoal burn well and are an
excellent fuel. Many people burn wood charcoal briquettes in outdoor barbecues. It is also used in
Page | 67

--- Page Break ---

pigments (colouring matter), in filters to remove the unwanted colours, flavors and odors. It is also
used as a drawing instrument.
Merits and De-merits of solid fuels.
Merits:-
(1) They are easy to transport.
(2) They are convenient to storage without any risk of spontaneous combustion.
(3) Their cost of production is low.
(4) They posses moderate ignition temperature.
De-Merits:-
(1) Their ash content is high.
(2) Their large proportion of heat is wasted.
(3) They burn with clinker formation.
(4) Their combustion operation cannot be controlled easily.
(5) Their cost of handling is high.
9.2.2 Liquids (Natural or Primary) Fuels
Petroleum is only natural or primary liquid fuel.
Petroleum (petra=rock and olum=oil) or mineral oil is dark greenish brown viscous oil found deep in
the earth crust. It is mainly composed of various hydrocarbons together with small amount of
organic compounds containing oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur.
The average composition of crude petroleum is
C = 79.5-87.1%, H = 11.5-14.8%, S = 0.1-3.5%, N and O = 0.1 to 0.5%
The oil is usually floating upon a layer of brine and has a layer of gas on top of it. The world
resources of oil are estimated as 30.00 million tons.
Mining of Oil:
The oil usually float upon a layer of salt water and a layer of natural gas upon it. It is present deep
below impervious rocks. Drilling hole and sinking pipes up to the oil bearing porous rock does
mining of oil. Oil usually rushes out itself due to hydrostatic pressure of nature gas. Alternatively it
may be mechanical pumped up by air lift pump. The later consists of two coaxial pipes lowered into
the base oil bed. Compressed air is forced through the outer pipe whereby oil comes out through the
inner pipe.
9.2.2.1 Liquid (Artificial or Secondary) Fuels:
These are mainly:-
i) Tar
ii) Kerosene oil
iii) Diesel oil
Page | 68

--- Page Break ---

i) Tar:
Tar is a group of thick and dark brown or black liquid. Most tars are by products of the conversion of
organic matter such as coal and petroleum are used in useful industrial products. It is condensed
from vapors given off during the manufacture of coke from bituminous coal. This tar is used as a raw
material for products such as disinfectants, Dyes perfumes, plastics, roofing as waterproofing
metrics as synthetic doings.
ii) Kerosene Oil:
It is an important petroleum product. With the development of jet engines, Kerosene has become a
material of far greater importance. It is used in domestic appliance and is always vaporized before
combustion. By using a fair excess of air it burns with a smokeless blue flame. On the other hand
when it is used in jet engines, it is injected into the considerable excess of air and is ignited.
The method used to remove sulphur Compounds (like thiophone) from kerosene is by washing with
alkali or by the action ammonium polysulphide and concentrated sulphuric acid.
iii) Diesel Oil:
In a diesel engine, the fuel is exploded not by spark but by the application of heat and pressure.
Diesel oil consists of a longer chain of hydrocarbons than internal combustion engine fuels. The
main characteristic of a diesel engine fuel is that it should easily ignite below compression
temperature. The induction lay should be as short as possible.
This oil generally contains C=85%, M=12% it calorific value is about 11,000 Kcal/kg and it in-320%.
Merits and Demerits of Liquid fuels:
Merits:-
1. They possess higher calorific value per units mass than solid fuels.
2. They burn without forming dust, ash, clinkers etc.
3. Their firing is easier and also fire can be extinguished easily by stopping the liquid fuel
supply.
4. They are easy to transport through pipes.
5. The flame produced by burning liquid fuels can easily be controlled by adjusting the liquid fuel
supply.
6. Liquid fuels are generally handled by pipes and one man can easily regulate large number of
furnaces simultaneously.
7. They are clean in use and economic in labour.
8. Loss of heat to chimney of air for complete combustion.
9. They require less access of air for complete combustion.
10. They require less furnance space for combustion.
11. There is no wear and tear of grate bars and cleaning of fires etc as in case of solid fuels.
12. There is no necessity with liquid fuel to maintain “banked fires” as in case of coal.
Page | 69

--- Page Break ---

De-Merits:-
1. The cost of liquid fuel is relatively much higher as compared with solid fuels.
2. Costly special storage tanks are required for keeping liquid fuels.
3. There is a greater risk of fire hazards, particularly in case of highly inflammable and volatile
liquid fuels.
4. They give bad odour.
5. For efficient burning of liquid fuels, specially constructed burners and spraying apparatus are
required.
6. Choking of sprayers is a drawback in oil firing.
9.2.3 Gas (Natural or Primary) Fuel:
Natural Gas is the only Natural or primary fuel. It is generally associated with petroleum deposits
and is obtained from wells dug in the oil bearing regions. The approximate composition of natural
gas is CH4=70-90%, C2H6=5.10%, H2=3%, CO+CO2=rest. The calorific value varies from 12,000 to
14,000 Kcal/m3. It is an excellent fuel and is quite popular as domestic fuel. It has recently been
used in the manufacture of a number of chemicals by synthetic processes.
9.2.3.Gas (Artificial or Secondary) Fuel:
These are:
(i) Coal Gas (ii) Producer gas
(iii) Oil Gas (iv) Water Gas.
i) Coal Gas:
0
Coal gas is obtained when coal is carbonized or heated in the absence of air at about 1300  C in
either coke ovens or gas-making retorts.
Coal gas is a colourless gas having a characteristic odour. It is lighter than air and burns with a long
smoky flame.
Its average composition is H2=4%, CH4=32%, CO=7%, CH4=32%, CO=7%.
3
C2 H4 = 3%, N2 = 4%, CO2= 1% and rest = 4%. 4,900 Kcal/m .
It is used as:
i) Illuminate in cities and town;
ii) A fuel gas.
iii) In metallurgical operations for providing reducing atmosphere.
ii) Oil Gas:
Oil gas is obtained by cracking of kerosene oil. Oil in a thin steam is allowed to fall on a stout red hot
cast iron retort which is heated in coal fired furnace. The resulting gaseous mixture passes out
through a bonnet cover to a hydraulic main of a tank containing water.
A good oil gas should have a golden colour. By proper adjusting the supply of air, gas of required
colour can obtained.
Page | 70

--- Page Break ---

The average composition of oil gas is, CH4 = 25.300, H2 = 50-55%, CO3 = 10.12%, co2 = 3%. Its
3
calorific value is about 6,600 Kcal/m . It is used as laboratory gas.
iii) Producer Gar:
Producer gas is essentially a mixture of combustible gases, carbon monoxide and hydrogen
associated with non combustible gases N2, CO2 etc.
It is prepared by passing air mixed with a little steam over a red hot coal or coke bed maintained at
0
about 1100  C in a special reactor.
The average composition of producer gas is; CO = 22.30%, H2 = 8.12; N2 – 52.55, CO2 = 3%. Its
3
calorific value is about 1,300 m .
It is a cheap, clean and easily preferable gas and is used:
1. For heating open hearth furnaces (in steal and glass manufacture) mulfles furnaces, retorts
(used in coke and coal gas manufacture etc.
2. As a reducing agent in metallurgical operations.
iv) Water Gas:
Water gas is essentially a mixture of combustible gases CO and H2 with a little amount of non-
combustible gases CO2 and N2. It is made by passing alternatively steam and little air through a bed
0
of red hot coal or coke maintained at about 900 to 1000  C in a reactor.
The average composition of water gas is H2 = 51%, CO = 4%, N2 = 4%, CO2 = 4%. Its calorific value
is about 2,800m.
It is used as;
i) A source of hydrogen gas;
ii) An illuminating gas and
iii) A fuel gas. Its flame is short but very hot.
Merits and Demerits of Gaseous Fuels:
Merits:-
1. They can be conveyed easily through pipelines to the actual place of need thereby
eliminating manual labour in transportation.
2. They can be lighted at a moment’s notice.
3. They have high heat contents and hence help us in having higher temperatures.
4. The heat of hot waste gas thereby affording economy in heat can preheat them.
5. Their combustion can readily be controlled for changes in demand like oxidizing or reducing
atmosphere, length of flame, temperature etc.
6. They burn without any soot (or smoke) and are ashless so there is no labour involved in ash
handling etc.
7. They are clean in use;
8. They do not require any special burners.
Page | 71

--- Page Break ---

9. They can be produced by using even the poorest quantity of coal etc.
10. They burn without heat losses due to smoke and convection currents.
11. They burn in slight excess of air supply.
12. They are free from solid and liquid impurities; hence, they do not affect the quality of metal
produced when used as metallurgical fuel.
13. Complete combustion without pollution is possible due to uniform mixing of air and fuel.
De-Merits:
1. Very large storage tanks are needed for them.
2. They are highly inflammable so chances of fire hazards are high in their use.
Characteristics of an Ideal Fuel:
A fuel to be ideal should satisfy the following requirements;
1. It should possess high calorific value.
2. It should have low moisture content.
3. It should be readily available in bulk at low cost.
4. It should possess moderate ignition temperature. Low ignition temperature can cause fire
hazards; while too high ignition temperature can cause difficulty in kindling the fuel.
5. Its velocity of combustion should be moderate. If the rate of combustion is low, then the
required high temperature may not be possible on the other hand, too high combustion rates
are also not required.
6. Its non combustible matter (ash, etc) content should be low.
7. It should be easy to transport without any danger of spontaneous combustion.
8. Its products of combustion should not be harmful.
9. Its cost of storage in bulk should be low.
10. It should burn with efficiency without much smoke.
11. It should not undergo spontaneous combustion.
12. Its combustion should be easily controllable.
13. In case of solid fuel, the size should be uniform so that combustion is regular.
9.3 Combustion.
9.3.1 Introduction:
Combustion is exothermic Chemical reaction which in companies by development of heat and light
at a rapid rate. Combustion raises temperature considerably. For example combustion of carbon
and oxygen.
C (s) + O2 (g) Co (g) + 97 Kcal.
Page | 72

--- Page Break ---

For proper combustion the substance must be ignited. Combustion temperature is defined as the
minimum temperature at which the substance ignites and burns without further addition of heat from
outside.
9.3.2 Combustion of Peat:
It is regarded as the first stage in the coalification of wood. Peat is mostly mined by manual Labour.
It is uneconomical fuel as it contains 80-90% water but on air drying (after 1-2 months drying) it
burns freshly.
The average composition of air dried peat is C = 57%, H2 = 6%, ash content = 2.5-6%. Its
coalification value is about 5400 Kcal/Kg on dry basis.
It is used as a fuel and for power generation, in countries like England, USA and Russia.
Page | 73

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-10
CARBONIZATION
10.1 Definition:
The process of decomposition of Coal (heating strongly in the absence of air), in which the volatile
matter escapes out and solid, liquid and gaseous produces are produced is called carbonization of
coal, e.g. the preparation of coke from coal.
10.2 Types of Carbonization:
0 0
In this process the coal is heated ats 500 -700  C. The coke produced is about 75-80% and it
contains about 5-15% volatile matter. The coke thus produced is not suitable for metallurgical use,
being not strong. However, it burns easily giving a smoke less, hot, radiant fire suitable for domestic
purposes. The byproduct gas is produced (130-15-m3), and is therefore a more valuable gaseous
fuel.
ii) High Temperature Carbonization:
0 0
This process is carried out at 900 -1200 C to produce coke of the right hardness. The coke
produced is 65-75% and contains 1-3% volatile matter. The byproduct gas produced is high in
3
volume (300-390 m3/tone) but its calorific value is low (5400-600 Kcal/m ).
10.3 Products:
Carbonization of coal produces following products:-
(a) Solid
(b) Liquid.
(c) Gases.
a) Solid:
The main solid product of carbonization of coal is “coke”. Coke is mainly used as a solid fuel in blast
furnaces.
Merits & Demerits of Solid Fuel:
Advantages:
i. They are easy to transport.
ii. They are convenient to storage without any risk of spontaneous explosion.
iii. Their cost of production is low.
iv. They possess moderate ignition temperature.
Page | 74

--- Page Break ---

Disadvantages:
i. Their ash content is high.
ii. Their large proportion of heat is wasted.
iii. They burn with clinker formation.
iv. Their combustion operation cannot be controlled easily.
v. Their cost of handling is high.
b) Liquid:
The liquid by products of carbonization are:-
1) Light oil.
2) Tar.
Merits and Demerits of Liquid Fuels:
i) They possess higher calorific value per unit mass than solid fuels.
ii) They burn without forming dust, ash, clinkers.
iii) Their firing is easier and also fire can be extinguished easily by stopping the liquid fuel
supply.
iv) They are easy to transport through pipes.
v) They can be stored indefinitely without any loss.
vi) The flame produced by burning liquid fuels can easily be controlled by adjusting the
liquid fuel supply.
vii) Liquid fuels are generally handled by pipes and one man can easily regulate large
number of furnaces simultaneously.
viii) They are clean in use and economic in labour.
ix) Loss of heat to chimney is very low due to greater cleanliness.
x) They require less access of air for complete combustion.
xi) There is no wear and tear of grate bars and cleaning of firs etc. as in case of solid
fuels.
Disadvantages:
i. The cost of liquid fuel is relatively much higher as compared to solid fuels.
ii. Costly special storage tanks are required for keeping liquid fuels.
iii. There is a greater risk of fire hazards.
iv. They give bad odour.
v. Specially constructed burners and spraying apparatus are required for efficient
burning.
vi. Choking of sprayers is a draw back in oil firing.
Page | 75

--- Page Break ---

c) Gases:
The main gases produced in the process of carbonization are:-
1) Ammonia.
2) Hydrogen Sulphuride.
3) Naphthalene.
4) Benzene.
The above mentioned compaction of gases is termed as “Coke oven gas” or “Coal Gas”.
Merits & Demerits Gaseous Fuels:
Merits:
1) The gas fuels can be handled with medium convenience.
2) They are cheapest of all types of fuels.
3) They extend their uses to which solid fuels may be put.
Demerits:
1) Greater risk of fire hazard.
2) They give bad odour.
3) Elaborate pipe network is required for their use.
4) Leakage of gas through pipe may produce risk of fire and danger to life.
5) Detection of leakage through pipe is difficult.
Page | 76

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-11
ANALYSIS OF COAL
11.1 Introduction:
To ascertain the quality of coal, two types of analysis are made:-
a) Proximate Analysis:
It involves the determination of:-
1) Moisture
2) Volatile matter
3) Ash
4) Fixed carbon
b) Ultimate Analysis:
It involves the determination of:-
1) Carbon and Hydrogen
2) Nitrogen
3) Sulphur
4) Ash
5) Oxygen
11.2 Proximate Analysis.
11.2.1 Moisture
0
1 gram of finely powdered coal in a crucible is heated at 105 C for 1 hour. The loss in mass is
reported as moisture on percentage basis. The moisture in a fuel evaporates during burning of fuel
and takes some of the heat liberated. Therefore, moisture reduces the calorific value and hence its
presence is undesirable. Another added disadvantage of moisture is, it quenches the fire in the
furnace.
11.2.2 Volatile Matter:
0
The dried sample of coal in (1) is then heated in a covered crucible at 950+20 C for exactly 7
minutes. The loss in mass is reported as volatile matter on percentage basis. A high volatile matter
containing coal burns with a long flame, high smoke and have low calorific value.
A high volatile matter content means that high proportion of fuel will be distilled and burned as a gas
or vapour. The volatile matter present in the coal may be as high as 50%. The volatile matter
present in the coal may be combustible gases (such as methane, hydrogen, carbon monoxide and
other hydrocarbons) or incombustible gases (like CO2 and N2). The presence of incombustible
gases is always undesirable as they do not add in heat value but increases the volume of the
furnace required. Overall the volatile matter affects the furnace volume and arrangement of heating
surface. Thus a furnace with small combustion volume or of shorts flame travel is not suitable for
burning a high volatile coal at high rates of combustion. Since a large proportion of volatile matter
Page | 77

--- Page Break ---

will escape unburnt. On the other hand, burning of low volatile coal necessarily requires forced
draught and the intensity of draught increases with the decrease in volatile matter percentage.
Volatile matter content is of special significance on coal gas manufacture and in carbonization
plants, particularly when by product recovery is the main object.
11.2.3 Ash:
0
1 gram of dried coal is burnt in an open crucible (i.e. in presence of oxygen of air) at 700-750 C in a
muffle furnace until a constant mass of residue is obtained. The residue is reported as ash on
percentage basis. Ash is useless matter and it reduces the heating value (i.e. calorific value) of coal.
It also sometimes causes trouble during burning by forming clinkers (i.e. fused ash blocks) which
block the interspaces of the grade on which the coal is being burnt. The supply of air for burning of
coal therefore, becomes irregular (i.e. interrupted).
The presence of ash (like moisture) increases transporting, handling and storage costs. It also
involves additional cost of ash disposal. The presence of ash also causes early ware of furnace
walls, burning apparatus and feeding mechanism.
11.2.4 Fixed Carbon = (100-% of Moisture + volatile matter ash).
Higher the percentage of fixed carbon, greater is its calorific value and better the quality of coal.
Hence, high percentage of fixed carbon is desirable. The percentage of fixed C helps in designing
the furnace and the shape of the fire box because it is the fixed C that is burnt in the solid state.
11.3 Ultimate Analysis:
Ultimate analysis involves the following determination.
11.3.1 Carbon and Hydrogen:
About 0.2 g of accurately weighed sample is burnt in a current of oxygen in a combustion apparatus.
C and H of the coal are converted into CO2 and H2O respectively. The gaseous products of
combustion are absorbed in KOH and CaCl2 tubes of known masses. The increase in mass of these
tubes is then determined.
C + O2 CO2; H2 + 1./2 O3 H2O
12 44
2KOH + CO2 K2CO3 + H2O
CaCl2 + 7H2O CaCl2 + 7H2O
Increase in mass of KOH tube x 12x 100
% of C = 
Mass of coal sample taken x 18
Increase in mass of CaCl2 tube x 12x 100
% of H = 
Mass of coal sample taken x 18
Page | 78

--- Page Break ---

Greater the percentages of carbon and hydrogen, better is the coal in quality and calorific value.
However, hydrogen is mostly associated with the volatile matter and hence it affects to anthracites.
Higher percentage of carbon in coal reduces the size of combustion chamber required. The amount
of carbon depends on the type of coal and increases with rank from lignites to anthracites.
11.3.2 Nitrogen:
About 1 g of accurately weighed powdered coal is heated with concentrated H2SO4 along with
K2SO4 (catalyst) in a long necked flask (called, kjeldahl’s flask). After the solution becomes clear, it
is treated with excess of KOH and the liberated ammonia is distilled over and absorbed in a known
volume of standard acid solution. The unused acid is then determined by back titration with standard
NaOH. From the volume of acid used by ammonia liberated, the percentage of N in coal is
calculated as follows:
Increase of acid used x Normality x 1.4
% of N = 
Mass of coal taken
Nitrogen has no calorific value and hence its presence in coal is undesirable.
11.3.3 Sulphur:
Sulphur is determined from the washings off obtained from the known mass sample of coal used in
a bomb calorimeter for determination of calorific value. During this determination S is converted into
sulphate. The washings are treated with barium chloride solution when barium sulphate is
precipitated. This precipitate is filtered, washed, heated to constant mass.
Mass of BaSO4 obtained x 32x 100
% of S in coal = 
233 x Mass of coal sample taken in bomb
Sulphur although contributes to the heating value of coal, but on combustion it produces acids (SO2)
which have harmful effects of corroding the equipments and also causes atmospheric pollution.
11.3.4 Ash:
Ash determination is carried out as in proximate analysis.
11.3.5 Oxygen:
It is obtained by difference.
% oxygen = 100 – Percentage of (C + H + S + N + Ash)
Oxygen content decreases the calorific value of coal (An increase in 1% oxygen content decreases
the clorific value by about 1.75) and hence is undesirable. As the oxygen content increases, the
capacity for the coal to hold moisture increases and the caking power decreases.
Page | 79

--- Page Break ---

Example:-
A sample of the Gandwana Coal of Jharia was analyzed as follows: Exactly 2500g was weighed into
0
a silica crucible. After heating for 1 hour at 110 C the residue weighed 2,415g. The crucible next
0
was covered with a vented lid and strongly heated for exactly 7 minutes at 950+20 C. The residue
weighed 1,528 g. The crucible was then heated without the cover until a constant weight was
obtained. The last residue was found to weigh 0.245g.
i) Calculate the percentage results of the above analysis.
ii) To which type of analysis does the above description belong?
Why is the analysis so named?
Solution:
This is an example of proximate analysis.
Percentage of moisture = Loss of moisture x 100
Mass of sample
Or percentage of moisture = (2.500 – 2.415 g) x 100
2.500 g
= 0.085 g x 100 = 3.40
2.500 G
Percentage of volatile matter = (2.145 g – 1.528 g) x 100
1.500 g
= 0.887 g x 100 = 35.48
2.500 g
Percentage of ash = 0.245 g x 100 = 9.80
2.500 g
Hence, Percentage of fixed carbon = 100 – (3.401 + 35.48 + 9.80
= 51.32
So complete proximate analysis (as received basis) of coal sample is Moisture = 3.40% volatile
matter = 34.48%; ash = 9.80%; fixed carbon = 51.32%.
Page | 80

--- Page Break ---

CHAPTER-12
MINE WATER
12.1 Underground Water
According to geological point of view, underground water may be divided into three classes:-
i) Meteoric Water.
ii) Connate Water.
iii) Magmatic Water.
i) Meteoric Water:
a) Water derived from rain, water courses, and other bodies is known as meteoric water.
b) This water passes down into the earth and part of it is stored in the pores and cracks in
the rocks, and part of it circulates.
ii) Connate Water:
a) Water that was trapped in sedimentary rocks while they were being formed is known as
connate water.
b) This water of course, belongs to the same geologic period as the rocks in which it is
formed.
iii) Magmatic Water:
a) Water formed from fluid magma is known as magmatic water.
b) As the magma comes to the surface, the water may be released in parts giving rise to hot
springs.
12.2 Sources of Water:
They are classified as follows:-
12.2.1 Surface Inflow through Out Crops:
It is the chief source of mine water in regions of heavy or moderate rain falls, especially where
mines are worked from the outcrops, and large drainage areas are above to extensive out crop
workings. In such cases, mines may be subjected to sudden floods.
12.2.2 Surface Water through Cracked Broken Measure:
It may be more dangerous than that from out crops. Where deposit has been worked by open or
shrinkage stops under fissured rock cover, cracks or broken rocks may admit large quantities of
both surface and ground water.
12.2.3 Water from Permeable Measures:
It may be expected from the formations like soft massive sand stones. It may enter in the earth as
seepage, or under pressure and often cover large areas. The relief can be obtained only by draining
entire water basin or by general lowering of ground water level.
Page | 81

--- Page Break ---

12.3 Water Table.
12.3.1 Introduction:
The water table is the boundary between the upper unsaturated zone in which the pores are empty
or only partially filled with water, and the underlying saturated zone in which the pores are full of
water. The water table commonly follows the topography of the surface.
12.4 Means of Dewatering:
It is generally cheaper to keep water out of mines than to remove it after it has entered. Although it
may be impossible to prevent the entrance of all water yet it may be reduced by giving attention to
the source of inflow. Entrance of surface water can be minimized by well planned ditching around
out crop or fractured areas. In permeable soil, ditches should be lined. If streams or drainage
channels crosses over fractured areas they may be diverted. However following method of
dewatering may be used in mines:-
i) Drain Tunnels
ii) Hoisting Water.
iii) Pumping.
Page | 82

--- Page Break ---

12.4.1 Drain Tunnels:
These are advantageous where location and topography permit. The chief advantage of a drain
tunnel lies in saving the cost of pumping and eliminating the danger of the mine being flooded
through failure of the pumps. Even though the tunnel may not be on the lowest level of the mine, the
cost of pumping water upto the tunnel may be less than for pumping it all the way to the surface.
The tunnel might also serve both as a haulage way and an airway.
12.4.2 Hoisting Water:
Hoisting water in tanks with the engine or motor on the surface has the merit of simplicity. It is only
useful for dewatering flooded mines. The high cost of the plant and the fact that the shaft cannot be
used for other purposes while water is being hoisted are important disadvantage. Water is delivered
intermittently and at a decreasing rate as the depth of hoisting increases. This method is less
economical than pumping but is useful in early dewatering of a mine.
12.4.3 Pumping:
Pumps are also used to drain out water from the mines. In general, pumps should be placed close
to the sump so that suction pipe as short as possible. If dirt and other debris are present in the
sump, the suction pipe should be protected to keep these materials out of the pump. A strainer and
a foot valve may be placed at the end of suction pipe and the end of the suction pipe be placed a
little above the bottom.
12.4.3.1Types of Pumps:
Pumps may be divided into two main categories. These are:-
i) Centrifugal (including turbine) Pumps.
ii) Reciprocating Pumps.
i) Centrifugal Pumps:
Centrifugal pumps depend on the rapid rotation of one or more impellers within a volute
casing or within a cylindrical casing provided with expanding passage. Such pumps run at
speeds ranging from 575 r.p.m. to as much as 3000 r.p.m. These are driven by electric
motors a steam turbines.
The centrifugal and turbine pumps are mainly used in mining. Fig. 12.2 shows a sketch of centrifugal
pump.
Page | 83

--- Page Break ---

Page | 84

--- Page Break ---

ii) Reciprocating Pumps:
The action of reciprocating pumps depends on relatively slow to and from motion of a bucket, piston,
plunger or ramp pumps. It revolves within a cylinder called the working barrel. This type of pump is
used where quantity of liquid to be moved is relatively small but the pressure is high. Fig 12.3 shows
a sketch of reciprocating pump.
12.4.4 Sumps.
Water is collected in Mines in Reservoirs called Sumps:
A sump is commonly placed at the bottom of a shaft. It is also preferable to have the sump on one
side, leaving the bottom of shaft dry.
It general, water should be collected at a higher point in the workings as far as possible to avoid
unnecessary height of pumping lift, but it can be modified according to the requirements. The main
collection point should be determined early in the development of a mine. Sumps excavated below
or on one side of track in entries, drifts or tunnels should be kept clean and open. If main sumps are
in broken or fissured ground, sumps should be lined with concrete to prevent water from percolating
into lower workings.
Page | 85

--- Page Break ---

12.4.4.1Size of Sumps:
It depends upon quantity of inflow of water. It should be large enough to take care of inflow while
pumps are stopped for repairs. The size of sumps should be such that it can with hold water upto 24
hours.
12.4.4.2Location of Pumps:
It should be carefully considered in laying-out of mine workings. It depends on the location of source
of water and quantity of water to be pumped out. A sump is commonly placed at the bottom of the
shaft, but it is preferable to have the sump at one side, leaving the bottom of the shaft dry.
In deep mines where water is pumped from the lower part of mines, sumps may be placed on
different levels, and each sump is provided with its own pump. This provides a flexible pumping
system, which however increases the additional cost for extra pumps. However, pumping in one lift
from the bottom of a deep shaft requires a heavy pump, extra heavy pipe and fittings. If a small
quantity of water is found on the upper levels it may be drained to the main sump at a lower level.
12.5 Grouting:
The process of grouting includes:-
12.5.1 Cementation:
The general term cementation implies the injection of liquid quick setting cement through bore holes
into the fissured and cracked strata in order to fill up any cavities, fissures, cracks or pores and
thereby strengthen and consolidate the strata making it impervious to water. It is applicable to all
cases of shaft sinking through firm but fissured water bearing strata where inflow of water is
excessive and unmanageable by pumping plant. It can be used successfully to seal porous rocks or
fissures containing sand or other fine loose material, but not in dealing with loose or running ground
(e.g. quick sand).
The cementation process involves following three operations:-
a) Boring.
b) Cementation.
c) Sinking and Walling.
a) Boring:
This is usually carried out with heavy percussive compressed air hammer drills weighing 50
to 75 Ibs. The bore rods being hollow so that water may be conducted to the cutting bit to
clear away the cuttings. The holes are bored from within the perimeter of the shaft, and on a
circle more or less concentric with it. The number and position of holes depends on the
diameter of the shaft and nature of ground. In porous strata (which is always most difficult to
seal) as many as 42 holes around the inner periphery of the shaft may be drilled.
The first series of holes begins from the dry ground or concrete bed above the water level. It
is desirable that holes should be inclined radically and tangentially at 1 in 10 or 1 in 15, so as
to ensure that the holes intercept all the fissures throughout the length of treatment and that
the base of the hoes shall be several feet outside the perimeter of excavation.
Page | 86

--- Page Break ---

As soon as a hole reaches a pre-arranged depth (say 30 ft.) or encounters a fissure
containing water, the bore rods are withdrawn and the stop valves closed. The hole
concerned is then coupled up by strong flexible hose to the cement pipes and is injected with
cement. Each of the holes is treated several times before it reaches the full dept as decided
before hand.
b) Cementation
The surface plant required for cementation included:-
i) A number of high pressure, double acting ram pumps, to inject cement (and
chemicals where required) into the ground.
ii) Cement mixing tanks in which cement is mixed in the desired proportions to
which pump suction pipes are connected.
iii) Silicate storage tanks, if chemical treatment is required. The silicate is generally
received at the sinking site as a solution.
iv) Sulphate dissolving and storage tanks. The sulphate is received in slabs and
lead lined tanks and phosphor-bronze pump fittings have to be used for its
control.
v) Pipe ranges and flexible tubing for connecting between the pipes and bore
holes.
Injection:
In fissured strata, if a hole intercepts only relatively small fissures, one injection of cement may be
sufficient to close off the water. If a large fissure or cavity is encountered more than one hole are
injected and the injection is suspended for a few hours until the cement is set. The hole is then
cleaned out by boring and the injection is repeated and so on until the cavity is completely closed
under high pressure. During the initial injections, the percentage of cement in water may be low, but
it is increased during the later injections, especially in the case of large fissures, to a maximum of
50%.
When the treatment of a length of ground is completed, the sinking may be proceeded, but the
bottom portion of 20 to 25 ft is not excavated. It is left in position to form a water tight plug through
which boring is carried ot in the subsequent length or stage of treatment, to eliminate risk of sudden
inrush of water. Each and every length of cementation is carried out by an entirely new series of
bore holes.
c) Sinking and Walling:
The operations i.e. drilling, blasting and removal of debris are similar to those in ordinary
sinking. Various types of linings have been used in combination with cementation process
including brick work, cast iron tubing, concrete blocks with concrete back filling, plain
Monolithic Concrete and reinforced concrete. In modern practice, however, either a plain
concrete or a reinforced concrete lining is generally used. Fig. 12.4 describes the general
features of a reinforced concrete lining.
Page | 87

--- Page Break ---

12.5.2 Freezing Process:
This method is suitable for any kind of heavily watered strata, including quick sands, and has been
employed with complete success in the most difficult ground. There are four different stages in
freezing process:-
i) The drilling and lining of the bore holes.
ii) The formation and maintenance of the ice column.
iii) The actual sinking process.
iv) The thawing of ice-wall.
i) The Drilling and Lining of the Bore Holes:
The first step is to drill 20-50 numbers of vertical bore holes through wet ground around and
at a short distance from the outside circumference of the shaft. These holes may be bored
from the surface or form a fore shaft, i.e. the upper portion of the shaft having a diameter
Page | 88

--- Page Break ---

about 4 yards greater than that intended for finished shaft and sunk only to a depth of about
10 or 15 ft.
It is most important that the holes should be bored vertically, with narrow limits, to ensure that
the ice wall when formed is continuous. Rotary method of drilling is employed using rock
roller bits, which gives better results in regard to both speed of drilling and vertically of the
holes. The minimum diameter of the holes is usually6 inches, depending on their depth and
the nature of the ground. Where necessary the holes may be lined with steel tubes, as boring
proceeds, to prevent caving of the sides, out the lining tubes are withdrawn after the freezing
tubes have been inserted.
ii) Freezing:
Two concentric freezing tubes are inserted in each bore holes for cold brine to be circulated.
i) An outer tube 5 inch diameter (sealed securely at its base).
ii) An inner tube 1 ½ inch diameter (open at lower end and reaching nearly to the
sealed end of the larger tube).
The outer tubes are connected at the surface to a circular main or distribution pipe of 8 inch
bore and the inner tubes are similarly connected to another circular main. Both mains are
fitted with valves and cocks to control the circulation of the brine as desired.
The brine is usually solution of calcium chloride CaCl2 (Magnesium chloride can also be
used). Refrigerator is used to cool the brine before recalculation in the freezing tubes, and an
hydrous ammonia NH3 is used as refrigerant or cooling agent.
Page | 89

--- Page Break ---

Fig. 12.5 represents the principle of the freezing circuits. The brine (at a temperature of about
0 0
-4 F or -20 C) is pumped down the inner tube A and goes to the bottom of the bore hole. It
then ascends between the inner and outer tubes A and B extracting heat from the strata and
0 0
its temperature rises to about +4 F or -15.5 C, and passes into a brine tank, where it comes
into external contact with the spiral coils of a refrigerator or ammonia evaporator. Thus the
brine is cooled for passing once again through the freezing tubes. This completes the brine
circuit.
Refrigerating agent (Anhydrous Ammonia) is circulated through the coils of the evaporator.
The liquid ammonia is converted into gas at the temperature of the brine as it rises through
the coils. The heat required for evaporation is taken from the brine, which is thereby cooled.
The gaseous ammonia, on leaving the evaporator, passes to an ammonia compressor,
0
where it is compressed to about 150 lb per square inch at 70 C. Then ammonia passes
through an oil separator into the coils of a condenser, where it liquidity under the influence of
cooling water at atmospheric temperature. The liquid ammonia is again expanded into gas in
the coils of the evaporator. This completes the circuit of refrigerant.
A constant supply of cold water is essential, and where an unlimited supply of cold water is
not available, it is necessary to install one or more cooling towers with pumps for continue
circulation of water.
In addition to ordinary sinking appliances, a special surface plant for freezing process is
required, which includes:-
a) A number of ammonia compressors (four or five units) complete with evaporators
and condensers.
b) A number of brine pumps (either double acting reciprocating pumps or centrifugal
pumps).
c) Water circulating pumps with cooling towers, where necessary.
d) The necessary pipe ranges for brine, ammonia and circulating water.
Circulation of brine may be carried out, in all bore holes simultaneously, the ice wall then
growing slowly around each freezing tube until the cylinders of ice join together. Alternatively,
the brine may be circulated at first in only two bore holes at opposite sides of the shaft until
the temperature in four adjacent holes falls sufficiently low. The brine is then circulated in
these four holes as well, and so on, the ice wall meanwhile growing in for different directions
until it finally joins in two places.
The time required for the ice wall to form varies from two to six months, depending on the
size, depth of the shaft and nature of strata. The thickness of ice wall is difficult to ascertain,
but it is stated to be 12 to 15 ft, measured from the circumference of the shaft when the depth
of bore holes is about 500 ft. Greater thickness are required and obtained with deeper
sinkings.
iii) Sinking and Lining:
The sinking of the shaft through frozen ground is carried out by conventional shaft sinking
methods. If ice wall is effectively formed, shot firing may be carried out without restriction,
Page | 90

--- Page Break ---

except low freezing explosives are used in the outer rings of holes to prevent damage to the
freezing tubes. 15 to 20 KW electric heaters may be suspended above the shaft bottom to
make conditions comfortable for men and to prevent icing of pneumatic tools.
Following shaft linings may be used for shaft support:-
a) Cast iron tubing backed with concrete.
b) Reinforced concrete lining.
c) Plain concrete lining.
iv) Thawing of Ice Wall:
When the shaft has been sunk and lined through the wet ground, freezing may be stopped,
the ground allowed thawing by circulating brine through the tubes after warning the brine by
passing it over steam coils at such a temperature that thawing begins at the foot of every
freezing tube and progresses gradually upward.
After completion of sinking, the freezing tubes may be withdrawn. It is important that the
holes shall be completely sealed with liquid cement injections to avoid the possibility of water
penetrating into coal measure strata below.
Page | 91

--- Page Break ---

